---
subtitle:
date: 2022-12-03
tags: Reading-Notes
---

# On the Aesthetic Education of Man

## Notes:
- In the modern world, which compared with the Greek, usually produces only abnormalities and centaurs, in which the individual, like that fabulous creature in the beginning of the Horatian Art of Poetry, is jumbled together out of pieces, here in the modern world in one and the same man the greed of the struggle for existence and the need for art show themselves at the same time: out of this unatural amalgamation has originated the dilemma, to excuse and to consecrate that first greed before this need for art. Therefore we believe in the 'dignity of man' and the 'dignity of labor.'
 - The Greeks did not require such conceptual hallucinations, for among them the idea that labor is a disgrace is expressed with startling frankness; and another piece of wisdom, more hidden and less articulate, but everywhere alive, added that the human thing also was an ignominious and piteous nothing and the 'dream of a shadow.' Labor is a disgrace, because existence has no value in itself; but even though this very existence in the alluring embellishment of artistic illusions shines forth and really seems to have a value in itself, yet that proposition is still valid that labor is a disgraced disgrace indeed by the fact that it is impossible for man, fighting for the continuance of bare existence, to become an artist. 

- Letter 1: However, while this technical form reveals truth to our understanding, it also conceals truth from our feeling; because, unfortunately, understanding has first to destroy the object of inner reflection if it would really make this object its own.
- What has been said of moral experience is even more true for the phenomena we beauty. Its entire magic rests upon its secret, and by dissolving the necessary bond between its elements its very being melts away. 

- Letter 6: Yet closer attention to the character of the age will make us wonder about the contrast between the form taken by mankind today and that of earlier forms, especially that of the Greeks. Our reputation for education and refinement, which we rightly value by comparison with all over merely natural humanity, is pulled up short by the natural humanity of the Greeks, for they freely embraced all the delights of art and worthiness of wisdom, though without being seduced by them as we have been. The Greeks not only shame us by a simplicity that is alien to our age; they also are our rivals, even our models, in respect of those very advantages in which we seek consolation and reassurance for our unnatural manners. At once complete in form and substance, at once ohilosophical and creative, at once gentle and energetic, the Greeks united the youth of imagination with the manhood of reason in a glorious humanity. At that beautiful time of the awakening of spiritual powers, sense and spirit had as yet no clearly separate domains; there had been no dissent that might have prompted them to form hostile, strictly demarcated camps. Poetry had not yet wooed wit, speculationn had not yet ruined itself through sophistry. If need be they could exchange functions, for each honored truth in its own way. However high the flight of reason, it made sure to retain its substance; however finely and sharply it made distinctions, it cut no corners. It did pull human nature apart and projected each element, enlarged, into the wonderful world of its gods; although this human nature was not merely broken into fragments , but combined in different proportions, no single deity lacking humanity in its entirety. How different are we moderns! The image of the human species in each of us has been enlarged, shattered and scattered as shards, not in proportioned admixtures; so that one has to go from one individual to another to reconstitute the totality of the species. 
- How did an individual Greek come to be representative of his era, and why does no modern man claim this distinction? Because the first was formed as a unity by nature, and the second by an intellect that divided and subdivided. 
- It was culture itself that wounded modern humanity in this way. On the one hand, the extension of empirical knowledge and sharper thinking rendered a more precise distinction of the sciences necessary, while on the other the elaborate machinery of the state demanded a more consistent separation of ranks and occupations; the inner unity of human nature was torn apart, and a ruinous dispute set its harmonious powers at odds. Intuitive and speculative understanding became inimical and occupied their own domains, whose border they now began to patrol with jealous mistrust; and the spheres within which their activities were confined were now ruled by a master they had themselves chosen, who not infrequently sought to suppress as inessential all other human endowments. While here an excessive imagination laid waste to the hard won fruits of understanding, elsewhere the spirit of abstraction consumed the fire at which the heart should have warmed itself, and imagination been kindled. 
- Greek states resembled a colony of polyps, for within them individuals enjoyed an independent life, although in times of necessity they could form into a whole; this now gave way to the artifice of a clockwork mechanism, the joining together of an infinite number of lifeless parts to create a new mechanically driven whole. State and Church, laws and manners were now torn apart; pleasure was separated from work, means from end, effort from reward. Eternally shackled to one small fragment of the whole, man imagined himself to be a fragment, in his ear the constant and monotonous noise of the wheel that he turned; never capable of developing the harmony of his being, and intstead of marking the humanity in his nature, he simply became the impress of his occupation, his particular knowledge.
- And, quite gradually, real individual life is extinguished, so that the threadbare existence of the abstract idea of the whole might prevail; the state remains forever alien to its citizens, finding no feeling for it. Forced to deal with the diversity of its citizens through their classification, experiencing humanity only through representation, hence at second hand, teh governor entirely loses contact with humanity, taking it for a mere construction of the intellect, while the goverened are in turn indifferent to the laws that barely relate to them.
- Since the spirit of speculation in the world of ideas sought immemorial possessions, it had to become a stranger to the world of the senses, and through its concern with form lost sight of matter.

- Letter 7: Until such a time as the inner separation of man is ended, and his nature is sufficiently developed to itself be the artist. 

- Letter 12:  We are driven by two contradictory forces which, because they impel us to realize their object, are quite properly called impulses. The first impulse, which I will call the material impulse, derives from the physical existence of man, or from his sensuous nature, and seeks to place him under the constraints of time, making him matter; not giving him matter, for that is proper to the free activity of a person who takes up matter and distinguishes it from himself as a persisting entity. But matter is here nothing but change, or reality that fulfills time; correspondingly the material impulse demands that change shall occur, that time shall have a content. This condition of time that is merely occupied is called sensation, and it is through this alone that physical existence is made manifest.
- The second of these impulses, which can be called the formal impulse, is based upon the absolute existence of man, or upon his rational nature; it seeks to set him at liberty, bring harmony to the variety of his appearance and affirm his person amidst all change of conditions. Since the last of these, as an absolute and indivisible unity, can never be in contradiction with itself, since we are for all eternity we ourselves, the impulse that strives to maintain personality can never demand anything other than what it must for all eternity claim; it decides for ever as it decides for the present and commands for the present what it will always command. With this it also enfolds the entire succession of time, which is to say: it annuls time and annuls change; it wishes to make the actual necessary and eternal, and the eternal necessary and actual; in other words, it insists upon truth and right.
- We are no longer individuals, but a species; the judgement of all minds is expressed by our own, the choice of all hearts is represented through our deed. 

- Letter 13: The more aspects there are to man's receptivity, the more flexibile it is and the greater the number of aspects presented to phenomena, so the greater amount of the world that man can grasp, the more faculties he develops within himself. The more power and depth that personality gains, the more freedom that reason gains, so the more world does man comprehend, so the more form he creates outside of himself. His culture would therefore consist of firstly, bringing about the most varied contact with the world for the receptive faculty, while intensifying as far as possible passivity in feeling; secondly, securing for the determining faculty the greatest independence from the receptive faculty, developing reason to the greatest possible degree of activity. Where both qualities are united, man will combine the most abundant existence with the greatest autonomy and liberty and, rather than losing himself in the world, instead draw into himself the sheer infinity of its phenomena and subordinate it to the unity of his reason. 

- Letter 15: Expressed as a general concept, the object of the material impulse is called life, in its wildest meaning: a concept signifying all material being, everything directly present to the senses. The object of the formal impulse, expressed again as a general concept, is called form, both in the figurative and in the literal sense of the word: a concept that includes all the formal properties of things, and all of their relations to the powers of thought. The object of the playful impulse, presented in general outline, can consequently be called living form: a concept serving to characterize all aesthetic properties of phenomena, what is in a word most generally called beauty.
- So long as we merely think of his form, it is lifeless, a mere abstraction; so long as we merely feel his life, it lacks form, is a mere impression. Only by his form living in our senses, and his life forming itself in our intellect, is he a living form, and that will always be the case whenever we judge him to be beautiful. 

- Letter 21: It is not then merely poetically permissable, but also philosophically proper, to call beauty our second creator. For whether beauty simply makes humanity a possibility for us, leaving to our own free will any decision about how far we wish to actualize this, it shares in common with our original creator, nature, which likewise did no more than offer the capacity for humanity, the fact that any use of this potentiality is left to a decision made by our own free will. 

- Letter 22: If the aesthetic disposition of the soul has in one respect to be treated as a nullity just as soon as one's attention is turned to individual and particular effects, in other respects it is to be regarded as a condition of supreme reality, given the absence of all barriers and the sum of powers jointly active within it. One cannot therefore say that those who regard the aesthetic condition as the most fruitful in respect of knowledge and morality are entirely wrong. They are in fact completely right, for a disposition of the soul that comprehends all of humanity must necessarily and potentially include within it every indivvidual expression; a disposition of the soul that removes all limits from the entirety of human nature must necessarily also remove these limits from every single expression of the same. And for exactly this reason that it provides exclusive protection to no one individual funciton of humanity, so it is favorable to one and all without discrimination, and it confers advantage on no individual because it is the foundation of the possibility for all. Every other operation confers upon the soul a special skill, but for doing so sets a particular limit; only the aesthetic leads to the state of unlimitedness. Every other condition upon which we can enter refers us back to a prior one, and for its termination requires a following one; only the aesthetic is a totality in itself, unitng in itself all the conditions of its origin and of its persistence. Only here do we feel ourselves torn from time; and our humanity expresses itself with a purity and integrity asif it had not suffered any impairment from the impact of external forces. 
- The reason for this is that even the most inspired music, by virtue of its materiality, has a greater affinity with our senses than true aesthetic freedom permits; even the most successful partakes more of the coincidental and accidental play of imagination, as its medium, than the inner necessity of the truly beautiful admits; even the most sublime sculpture borders upon rigorous science by virtue of its conceptual precision. These special affinities diminish as the attainment of a work from these three kinds of art increases; and it is a necessary and natural consequence of their perfection that, without any change to their objective bounds, the various arts become ever more similar to each other on their impact upon the soul. In its highest refinement music has to become form, working upon us with the serene power of Antiquity; the plastic arts must, in their highest perfection, become music and move us by their directly sensuous presence; poetry in its most complete development must seize us as music does, but also like the plastic arts envelop us with serene clarity. This marks the perfection of style in every art: that it is able to remove its own limits without annuling its own specific properties, and by prudent use of its particular nature lend it a general character. the work of the artist must overcome not only the limitations that the specific character of his art involves, but also those presented by the particular material with which he works. In a genuinely fine work of art the content should do nothing, the form everything; for it is form alone that has an impact on the whole man, while content affects only his individual powers. 

- Letter 25: So long as man in his initial physical condition responds only passively to the sensuous world, simply by feeling, he is still completely at one with it; and because he is himself just part of the world, there is as yet no world for him. It is only when he is in his aesthetic condition, standing apart from himself or observing himself, that his personality detaches itself from this world; and beacuse now he has ceased to identiy himself with that world, it is now evident to him. That which first connects man with the surrounding universe is the power of reflective contemplation. Whereas desire seizes at once its object, reflection removes it to a distance and renders it inalienably her own by saving it from the greed of passion. The necessity of sense which he obeyed during the period of mere sensations, lessens during the period of reflection; the senses are for the time in abeyance; even ever-fleeting time stands still whilst the scattered rays of consciousness are gathering and shape themselves; an image of the infinite is reflected upon the perishable ground. As soon as light dawns in man, there is no, longer night outside of him; as soon as there is peace within him the storm lulls throughout the universe, and the contending forces of nature find rest within prescribed limits. Hence we cannot wonder if ancient traditions allude to these great changes in the inner man as to a revolution in surrounding nature, and symbolize thought triumphing over the laws of time, by the figure of Zeus, which terminates the reign of Saturn. As long as man derives sensations from a contact with nature, he is her slave; but as soon as he begins to reflect upon her objects and laws he becomes her lawgiver. Nature, which previously ruled him as a power, now expands before him as an object.

- Here we concieve of nature as nothing other than the sum total of all possible appearences i.e., our phenomenological reality, on whose account alone is called the object of all possible experience. Only by the development of rational self reflection did man throw himself out of the cradle of purity and into history. For the universal historian draws out of himself the underlying harmony of the world of appearances and transplants them outside himself into the order of things, i.e., he introduces a rational purpose into the course of the world and a teleological principle into world-history. Art and literature are then concieved on a historical level, corresponding to the transcendental psychology of formal and sensible minds. The interplay with the computer makes this entwined and quantic, a constantly changing synthesis of the two ...[]

- The aesthetic state/(read network) consummates the will of the whole through the nature of the individual ...[]