---
subtitle:
date: 2022-12-02
tags: German-Idealism
---

# Johann Georg Hamann

Key ideas here come after his religious experience in London. He works to re-instantiate the metaphysical significance of art, stresses the importance of the artists personal vision, emphasizes the significance of language for thought and the social, historical, and cultural dimensions of rationality. In London Hamann had a conversion to Lutheranism, turned to the bible and believed that God was always communicating with us. "God is a Writer and his creation is language.” He believes that reason is not autonomous and universal but governed by the subconscious and inseparable from language and culture. He believes that the supernatural is embodied within the natural as opposed to Kant's dualism. The idea of God acting through man disputes the sovereignty of reason, instead, the sensation of faith gives us a special kind of intuitive knowledge which is superior to knowledge gained by reason, since it gives us direct insight into existence itself. It transcends reason and is not demonstrable nor refutable by it, using Humean scepticism he defends religion and faith from reason. Kant thinks that reason gives our life significance, but this is anthropomorphic and judging God by human standards of reason.

To Hamann, the Aufklärung pretends to battle superstition and mysticism, while falling prey to abstractions. He posits the idea that intuitive knowledge, which is not reducible to the discursive and superior to reason, is gained through art. This idea is developed in the Aesthetica in Nuce, providing the organon and criterion for the higher form of knowledge promised in the Sokratische. Hamann states that the artist should not comply with mores rules or artistic principles but should express ones passions and personal visions, rules inhibit personal expression. Since God reveals himself through man and specifically through the senses and passions, the artist must embrace personal expression to have metaphysical insights into reality itself. Art is the purest insight into reality, it ought to imitate nature and reveal the word of God, thus is the highest form of knowledge and the only instrument to grasp the truth. Such knowledge is purely immediate since art is a non-discursive medium, avoiding all the pale abstractions of reason, which cannot apprehend the richness of experience. This allows Hamann to re-establish the metaphysical significance of art, it translates and deciphers the word of God, equating truth and beauty. This is a fusion of subjectivism in expression and objectivism in metaphysical order. Post Hamann, metaphysics regained is wings after the onslaught of Kant's Kritik, but these wings were artistic, not pure reason. Art becomes the new criterion for metaphysical knowledge, avoiding the pitfalls of pure reason. Paving the way for the Sturm und Drang and German romanticism.

Hamann's Metakritik is the starting point of post-Kantian philosophy. Questions like: What is reason and how can we criticize it? How do we know its contents, conditions, and limits? If all must submit to criticism, then criticism should submit to criticism too. Objection is raised against the hypostasis of reason i.e., abstraction from embodiment in language, tradition, and experience, and specific objection is raised against the noumenal realm. For Hamann, reason exists purely in activities and has no specific faculty. We must look to how people think and act through culture and language since thought does not precede language. However, Kant doesn’t ignore language, for Kant, understanding is deduced from judgement which is the syntactic form of language. Hamann’s chief disagreement is with Kants dualism. Since language is phenomena, the idea that reason is permanent and universal one may dispute with the idea that rationality is cultural and varying. Kant has divided the intellectual functions and Hamann seeks unification. Understanding is intelligible, non-spatial and non- temporal, while sensibility is phenomenal, temporal, and spatial. Words bring together the intelligible and sensible for Hamann. 

Kants dualism, neglect of language and transcendental method are Hamann's main targets. Kant believes that it is possible to construct a priori the syntax of grammar or language through introspection. He claims that we can construct the form (number, types, systematic order of categories of understanding and ideas of reason) of knowledge from its concept, but not the matter of knowledge. Hamann disagrees because he thinks reason is not a-priori to language. We need to unify Kants dualisms and must grasp mans faculties as a whole to explain the possibility of knowledge. We need to find a common source from which understanding and sensibility spring, to find a unity in difference. The problem is to formulate the unifying principle of intellect and reason while accounting for equal and coordinate role of both, a non-reductivist principle that grants equal status to both terms.