---
subtitle:
date: 2022-12-06
tags: Aesthetics German-Idealism
---

# Lectures on Aesthetics

Serious art has a theme and, at a deeper level, a meaning: it represents God or the absolute in a sensory form. God reveals himself through man and so the artist has metaphysical insight into reality itself. Since art is purest insight into reality it is the highest form of knowledge and the only instrument to grasp truth. It translates and dechiphers the word of God, this equates beauty and truth, art becomes criterion for metaphysical knowledge, avoiding nihilistc pitfalls of pure reason. 

The difference between Greek and German art is not merely a matter of aesthetic merit. Art dominated Greek life and thought. Homer developed a mythology that shaped not only later Greek art, but also their religion, morality and way of life. Why has Goethe not been able to do for the Germans what Homer did for the Greeks? The answer is not that Goethe is a lesser talent but that modern society has no place for a new Homer. Schelling hoped for the creation of a modern epic, of a new mythology that would present a total vision of the modern world and give rise to a higher type of art and a higher aesthetic form of life. Hegel had no such hope: mythology belongs to an age before the emergence of abstract thought. `[[Naïve and Sentimental Poetry]]` In early naive art there is a grand spirited union of society and people are not alienated, but with the modern sentimental novel, as the development of rational self reflection has won, we have a single perspective, trapped in our own minds, Sorrows of Young Werther, his won ability for subjective rational self reflection distances himself from the totalising spirit of society, this is why he is alienated, due to his ability to criticize himself, there is no mitigative narrative to unite people. 

Recall Schiller distinguishes between the naive poetry of the Greeks from the sentimental poetry of modernity. He saw art and aesthetic experience as the key to resolving the oppositions that fragment and alienate modern man, oppositions between duty and inclination, between theory and practice, and between different specialisms in the intellectual and practical division of labour. 

Hölderlin had argued that art is the pinnacle of philosophy, that it is in fact superior to philosophy itself, since it represents in an objective form the union of the mind, or spirit, and nature: the artists creativity combines the necessity of nature and the freedom of spirit. It has the sole power to disclose the absolute fundamental nature of the world. `[[Johann Georg Hamann]]`; `[[History of the Art of Antiquity]]`.

Art in Hegel's view portrays the human spirit, first in a bodily form, later in a more spiritual form. Art reveals the absolute, it represents the absolute as spirit, and it reveals or embodies the Idea. 

We begin with a simple, idealized account of what men were like when they had no art, religion, or conceptual thought. In such a condition, man perceives external objects and has desires for them. At this stage man views the world as merely sensuous, no more than a collection of individual entities to be percieved and consumed. Correspondingly, man himself is no more than a sensuous creature, no more than a series of sense percepptions and of sensuous or physical desires and satisfactions. The state of mans mind conforms precisely to the state of the world as he so far views it. Man can only think in terms of the sensuous material given to him, by manipulating material objects. Suppose he carves a piece of wood into the shape of a bison, this liberates him from the sensuous world in several respects: he no longer attempts to eat the wood, no longer attempts to chase the bison he has made, but contemplates it. He distances himself from sensuous desires and becomes capable of disinterested contemplation of the world as well as appetitive consumption. As an artist he is not concerned with a particular bison, but with the bison in general or the bison as a universal. Thought and knowledge are not fully formed until we express them. Thus man now views the world otherwise than previously. It is no longer a collection of individual things, it contains a type of thing, whose features transcend our fleeting encounters with them and desires for them. Reason is embodied in experience i.e. language, tradition and culture and we cannot abstract reason from these factors. It is not to be hypostasised. `[[Johann Georg Hamann]]` 

There is a symmetry between the mind of the artist and the absolute, the essence and meaning of the world. The absolute then, as portrayed in a given period, corresponds to the stage of development attained by the human spirit in that period. If any entity within the world is to be taken as the model for the absolute, it should be the human mind, since only a thinking mind can accomodate the thoughts that underlie and structure the phenomenal world. 

The absolute is not a static underlying essence, whose manifestations are inessential to it - as God is sometimes conceived as fully formed indepenedntly of his creation and as choosing to create the world from pure benefice. The absolute's manifestations are essential to it, and it develops along with them. Man and his cognitive and practical activities are not simply a manifestation of the absolute, but the highest phase of the absolute, the phase in which the absolute becomes self consciousness and returns to itself. 

(Note-to-self: this is unfinished).