---
subtitle:
date: 2022-12-06
tags: Aesthetics German-Idealism 
---

# Absolute Idealism

While the absolute idealists often disagreed with Spinoza’s specific conception of the absolute, they understood the concept of the absolute in the same general sense as Spinoza. Their absolute was like Spinoza’s substance because it was that which has a self-sufficient essence or existence. For the same reasons as Spinoza, they insisted that the absolute has to be nothing less than the universe as a whole.

Their conception could be sumarised in three theses. The first thesis is straightforward monism: that the universe consists in not a plurality of substances but a single substance; in other words, the only independent and self-sufficient thing is the universe itself. The second thesis is a version of vitalism: that the single universal substance is an organism, which is in a constant process of growth and development The third thesis is a form of rationalism: that this process of development has a purpose, or conforms to some form, archetype, or idea. Putting these theses together, absolute idealism is the doctrine that everything is a part of the single universal organism, or that everything conforms to, or is an appearance of, its purpose, design, or idea.

The idealist dimension of absolute idealism comes from its rationalism. This makes it idealism in a different sense that Kantian critical idealism or Descartian empirical idealism. We are not referring to the mental, subjective, or conscious, but to the rational, the archetypical, or intelligible. To claim that everything is ideal in this sense does not mean that it is an appearance existing for some consciousness, but that it is a manifestation of the rational, archetyical and intelligible. Idealism in this sense is the doctrine that everything is ideal because it is a part, aspect, or appearance of the absolute idea.

It is sometimes held that all oppositions between finite things, and especially between the ideal and the real, or the subjective and objective, have not a real but only an ideal existence. To say that they have only an ideal existence in this sense does not mean that they are an appearance of the absolute idea, but that their appearance of an independent reality outside the absolute exists only for reflection, or only for the intellect as an artificial and arbitrary abstraction. This sense of ideal is virtually opposed to the first because it attributes ideal status to that which is outside the absolute, whereas the first sense attributes ideal status to that which is inside it.

The Platonic heritage of Hölderlin: in one form or another the absolute is identified with the logos or telos, the archetype, idea, or form that governs all things. The absolute is not transcendent being, which is somehow presupposed by reflection and consciousness, and so can never be its object. Hölderlin was critical of the powers of a discursive reason, but true to his Platonic tradition, held tight the powers of an intuitive reason. Hence he developed a doctrine of intellectual intuition, identified with the aesthetic feeling of perception. His faith in an immediate form of knowledge should be placed within the Platonic tradition, which had always claimed that an insight into the forms transcends discursive elaboration. 

Absolute idealism does not hold that the absolute exists fully and entirely apart from and prior to all subjectivity, as if consciousness were simply irrelevant to its essence and existence. For the absolute idealists insist that subjectivity is a necessary manifestation of the absolute, and indeed its highest manifestation, apart from which it cannot fully exist or completely realize its nature.

Platonism plays a central role in the worldview of absolute idealism, many Platonic themes: desire as longing to return to the eternal, the unity of truth and beauty, the role of poetry as a medium of knowledge, the fundamental role of love as a power of the soul - reappear in the writings of the young romantics in the late 1790's. The unity of universal and particular in the Platonic form provided the perfect model for the unity of the one and many in the absolute itself. The doctrine of intellectual intuition, which became so important for Schelling, Novalis, Schlegel, and Hölderlin, also has Platonic sources, whether they lie in the ectasy of the poet in Phaedo or the intellectual perception of the guardian in the Republic. 

How did the absolute idealists defend their worldview against Kant’s critique of metaphysics? How did they attempt to justify the greater realism and naturalism involved in their absolute idealism? The absolute idealists were well aware of Kant’s challenge, and they were eager to meet it on his terms. No new metaphysics could come forward as a science alone until it had withstood the tribunal of critique. Their first response to Kant’s challenge is a paradox: only absolute idealism realizes the true spirit of the Kantian philosophy. Ironically, the young idealists revive metaphysics in the name of Kant, the very thinker who banished it. Behind this paradox lies their belief that only absolute idealism can remain true to the basic principle of Kant’s philosophy—the principle of subject–object identity—and solve its fundamental problem—the explanation of the possibility of objective knowledge. Although absolute idealism is indeed metaphysics, and in the very sense prohibited by Kant and Fichte, its metaphysics is necessary to solve the outstanding problem of Kant’s philosophy according to its own guiding principle. The central dilemma of the critical philosophy is that it can resolve its fundamental problem only if it answers metaphysical questions, and so goes beyond its own limits on knowledge. To explain this paradox, it is necessary to consider one influential line of criticism of Kant’s philosophy in the early 1790s, a set of objections put forward by Platner, Hamann, Maimon, and Jacobi. They argued that Kant had failed to provide a convincing answer to the central question behind the transcendental deduction: ‘How do a priori concepts apply to the given empirical manifold of sensibility?’ Their diagnosis of this failure put the blame on Kant’s unbridgeable dualism between understanding and sensibility. Kant insists that knowledge requires the most intimate interchange between the concepts of the understanding and the intuitions of sensibility—“concepts without intuitions are empty, intuitions without concepts are blind”— yet his dualism is so drastic that it forbids any interaction at all. For the understanding is an active, intellectual faculty, whose operations do not appear in space and time; and sensibility is a passive, empirical faculty, whose workings are in space and time. How, then, could these faculties interact with one another?

While that activity is purely spontaneous, formal, and noumenal, the manifold of sense is inert, material, and phenomenal. How, then, can there be any interaction between them? The problem is not only that infinite striving cannot end, but that it cannot even begin.

The starting point of absolute idealism is a rejection of all forms of dualism, because these make it impossible to explain the correspondence between the subject and object involved in knowledge. It is imperative to reinterpret the principle of subject–obect identity, however, because if it is understood only subjectively, in terms of the self-consciousness of the transcendental subject, dualism still remains. There is still a gulf between the transcendental self-consciousness of the transcendental ego and the empirical manifold. This principle must be reformulated in two respects. First, it is necessary to universalize or objectify it, so that all its restrictions to the subject are removed; in other words, subject–object identity does not refer simply to the self-consciousness of the subject but to the single infinite substance of which the subjective and objective are only appearances or attributes. Second, it is neessary to vitalize it, so that it refers to a single living force, of which the subjective and objective are only its different degrees of organization and development.

The young romantics were, of course, perfectly aware of the challenge of skepticism. They had themselves developed a form of radical skepticism that questions all first principles and all acts of faith. They also accept much of Jacobi’s and Kant’s critique of reason, especially its central thesis that the unconditioned or absolute cannot be known by discursive or conceptual means. Following Kant and Jacobi, they make two arguments against such knowledge. First, all conceptualization is determination, involving some form of negation where one predicate is contrasted against another; but the absolute is the indivisible whole of all that exists, and so it cannot be determinate or contrasted against anything else. Second, all explanation is conditional in form, assuming that something happens only if some other condition is fulfilled; but the absolute is the unconditioned, acting from the necessity of its own nature alone. All discursivity therefore transforms the absolute into something it is not, whether that is a finite determination or something conditional. As Novalis summed up the predicament: “We seek the unconditioned and always find only things.”

One of the characteristic tenets of absolute idealism around the late 1790s and early 1800s is its faith in the powers of art, its attempt to displace the primacy of practical reason in critical idealism with the supremacy of the aesthetic. The romantics’ belief in the powers of art fully emerges when they make aesthetic experience the organon or ratio cognoscendi of absolute knowledge. While they insist that we cannot know the existence of the absolute through reason, they also stress that we can know it, if only vaguely and obscurely, through immediate aesthetic intuition. We know that there is an infinite universe outside us, that there is something much greater than us on which we depend, through aesthetic experience. The feeling of the sublime, the longing to reunite ourselves with all things, and the experience of love, in which I see myself in others as others see themselves in me, show us that we know an other that transcends our own circle of consciousness.

This is not an escape from criticism, the idealists believe, because the same is the case with our normal sense perception. We cannot verbalize, conceptualize, or prove our experience of colors, sounds, and tastes. Either we have the experience or we do not. All that we can do is provide some figurative or allegorical expression of them, which is, of course, the province of poetry, painting, and music.
This faith in the sovereignty of art went hand-in-hand with the absolute idealists’ organic concept of the universe: to regard nature as an organism and as a work of art are one and the same. The universe is nothing less than a natural work of art, and a work of art is nothing less an artifical organism. Hence the realms of truth and beauty, the natural and the aesthetic, coincide. As Schlegel explained the general standpoint of idealism: “Idealism considers nature as a work of art, as a poem.”

Although the implicit structure of the third Kritik supported the sovereignty of the aesthetic, Kant also denied aesthetic experience any metaphysical stature. In his view, aesthetic judgements are not cognitive, but only express a universalizable pleasure, which is not an objective property of appearances. Aesthetic experience is thus demoted to a status worse than in Plato’s cave: it tells us only about our feelings about appearances, and so nothing even about appearances, let alone things-in-themselves.

## Hölderlin & Absolute Idealism

Hölderlin insisted that poetry is not simply a popular medium for philosophical truths; it is not as if philosophy and poetry have the same content but simply represent them in different forms, one appealing to feeling and imagination and the other to reason. Rather, poetry is the source of insights and ideas that philosophy presupposes but cannot express in its discursive language. The only appropriate medium for these insights and ideas lies in the metaphorical and concrete language of poetry. To establish the primacy of poetry, Hölderlin adopted a bold strategy: he would show how the discursive procedures of philosophy ultimately presuppose an intuitive awareness of the whole, which is accessible only to aesthetic sense. Only such awareness saves philosophy from skepticism and the illusions of pure reason.

Aesthetic sense demands a contemplative rather than active relation to nature: we must treat nature as if it were an end in itself, as if it had a value and existence in its own right apart from our moral purposes. As Kant saw and Schiller stressed, aesthetic perception demands the autonomy of its object, its freedom from moral ends, the recognition of its inherent value.
For the same reason, however, Hölderlin could not bear the regulative constraints of Schiller’s and Kant’s aesthetics. While Hölderlin accepted Kant’s and Schiller’s belief in the autonomy of aesthetic values, he held that they had not gone far enough, stopping short of recognizing the metaphysical or ontological status of beauty. For Hölderlin, beauty is not simply pleasure in appearances, and still less merely a symbol of the good; rather, it is nothing less than the harmonic structure of reality itself. It was Hölderlin’s great step beyond Kant and Schiller to remove their as if clause behind aesthetic contemplation, making the aesthetic not merely a regulative principle or a way of looking at things but a constitutive principle about reality itself.

Nature was not a threat to our autonomy, as in Kant and Fichte, but the complement to our identity, or that which makes us whole once again. Nature was also sublime, infinite, and divine. In this respect Spinoza’s nature must have suited Hölderlin. For what could be more sublime than Spinoza’s single infinite substance? It is important to recognize, however, that the En kai pan never had a strict Spinozist meaning for Hölderlin. The concept of nature that emerges from the early poems is clearly vitalist. Thus the Tübinger hymns celebrate the force of love behind all of creation, which animates all of nature, and which realizes itself in the love between human beings. But such an animated world does not square well with Spinoza’s banishment of final causes, and still less with his endorsement of Cartesian mechanism. It is indeed difficult to understand how Spinoza’s universe, which is cold, indifferent and mathematical, can excite much sympathy for nature. If Spinoza’s universe is sublime, it is not friendly or alive. It is a cosmos designed more for stoical self-control than poetic sentiment. So, clearly, Hölderlin had to reinterpret Spinoza. The crucial question then concerns the sources of his reinterpretation.

Schiller had been Hölderlin’s hero from his earliest days, and he read all his work avidly. The Briefe sketched a vitalistic monism especially important for Hölderlin. It anticipates all the fundamental themes of the Tübinger hymns: that love is the creative force behind the universe; that the structure of the cosmos is revealed in beauty; that everything in nature has a soul; and that the creation consists in a hieroglyph, a secret language. Schiller’s early cosmos was indeed just as pantheistic as Spinoza’s:

- God and nature are two quantities that are perfectly equal. The whole sum of harmonic activity, which exist together in the divine substance, is in nature, the image of this substance, individuated in innumerable degrees, measures and stages. Nature is the infinitely divided God.

The influence of Plato must be stressed in considering Hölderlin’s anticipation of absolute idealism. For one of his decisive moves toward this idealism—granting constitutive status to aesthetic ideas—was ultimately inspired by Plato. This becomes clear if we consider Hölderlin’s October 10, 1794 letter to Neuffer, where he first reveals his intention of writing an essay on the aesthetic ideas. This essay, he explains, will show the necessity of going beyond the limits that Kant and Schiller assign to aesthetic judgment. To go beyond their restrictions could mean only one thing: refusing to see aesthetic ideas merely as regulative principles that we should read into appearances, and granting them instead a constitutive status to refer to the structure of reality itself. The Platonic inspiration for this move becomes apparent when Hölderlin explains that his essay will take the form of a commentary on a specific passage from Plato’s Phaedrus. Unfortunately, Hölderlin does not reveal the specific passage. It has been conjectured that Hölderlin had in mind, where Socrates explains that the power of reason to unify a multiplicity of particulars presupposes recollection, and more specifically the memory of our previous perception of reality itself.

Hence Hölderlin’s attempt to go beyond Kant and Schiller was an attempt to restore the integrity of the Platonic ideas, to give them back their status as creative principles that they had lost in the critical philosophy. It does not work to see them simply as regulative principles, Hölderlin holds, because we can unify a manifold only if we already presuppose the form inherent in it. His argument here ultimately goes back to Socrates in the Meno: that we can search for unity, a pattern in particulars, only if we have already had some experience of that unity or pattern itself. We shall soon see that Hölderlin proposed other arguments of a less Platonic kind for the constitutive validity of the aesthetic ideas; but it seems that his original argument drew its inspiration from Plato.

The fragment ‘Urtheil und Seyn’ states Hölderlin’s own positive account of the absolute. He identifies the absolute, the unity of subject and object, with being. Hölderlin implicitly equates being with Spinoza’s single universal substance. This substance can be described as the identity of subject and object because both the subjective and objective, the ideal and the real, are aspects of it. That Hölderlin called subject–object identity “being” was probably due to the influence of Jacobi, who had already identified Spinoza’s immanent ensoph with being pure and simple. Hölderlin’s claim that the absolute is not the ego but being seems to pit a realistic concept against an idealistic one. Rather than holding that thought precedes being, Hölderlin now appears to maintain that being precedes thought. It is as if he were endorsing Jacobi’s interpretation of Spinoza: “Thinking is not the source of substance, but substance is the source of thinking.” But it is important to see that Hölderlin does not mean this. When he claims that the absolute is being he means that it is neither idealistic nor realistic, neither subjective nor objective alone, but that it is both of them yet still neither of them because it is nothing more nor less than their pure unity. The whole point of Hölderlin’s principle is indeed to overcome all forms of dualism, whether they completely separate the subject or object or emphasize one at the expense of the other. The term ‘being’ was perfectly appropriate to express such pure identity, because both the subjective and objective are aspects of being and share in it equally; being is not determinate in any respect, neither more subjective nor more objective.

Hölderlin is now making the more radical claim that there must be a distinction between subject and object within self-consciousness itself. This is a point that Fichte would resist to the last, because it implies that complete self-consciousness is impossible. If there is a distinction between the subject and object within self-consciousness, the subject will know itself only on pain of an infinite regress. What is Hölderlin’s basis for this stronger claim? There are at least three reasons for it, all of them implied by, or at least consistent with, the text of ‘Urtheil und Seyn.’ The first is that it is possible to formulate or express self-knowledge only by making some distinction between the subject and object. This is because any attempt to formulate or express self-knowledge requires judgment, which involves some distinction between subject and predicate. Hence, playing on the presumed etymology of the term ‘judgment’ in German (Urteil), Hölderlin explains that judgment is the act of original separation (Ur-teilung) because it is divided into a subject and predicate. He argues that this distinction holds even for the judgment ‘Ich bin Ich,’ the first principle of the Wissenschaftslehre, which is supposed to state the self-consciousness of the self-positing subject. Although the content of the judgment ‘Ich bin Ich’ affirms the identity of the subject and object, its form implies a separation between them because it is expressed as a distinction between subject and predicate.

Whatever the precise form of his argument, Hölderlin’s general intent in ‘Urtheil und Seyn’ is to provide something on par with a transcendental deduction of Spinoza’s concept of substance, and so to avoid any charge that he is simply relapsing into metaphysical dogmatism.

With his argument for the primacy of being in ‘Urtheil und Seyn,’ Hölderlin had taken another crucial step in his program to establish the primacy of the aesthetic. Since in Hyperion Hölderlin identifies the one and all with beauty, and since being is the element of identity or unity of the one and all, it follows that being is an essential element in beauty itself. The priority of being over the ego—its more basic role as the fundamental condition of experience—is then tantamount to the primacy of the aesthetic itself.

Rather, the absolute is the object of a special kind of experience, the intuition or feeling that arises from aesthetic sense. It is important to see, however, that Hölderlin never drew such a strong conclusion. He certainly did not regard the one and the all as something unknowable or transcendent. While he indeed argued that this ground is the condition of all sensible intuition or discursive thinking, and so cannot be the object of such intuition or thinking, he also held that it is the object of an intellectual intuition. This intellectual intuition, he maintains, can be found only in aesthetic experience.

That there is some kind of intuition or experience of the absolute is also a leitmotiv of Hyperion. When Hyperion describes the consolation he finds in the arms of nature, he often describes his experience as a direct awareness of the one and all itself. He writes, for example, that "Just as Jupiter’s eagle heard the song of the muses, so I listen to the wonderful infinite tone within me" Hyperion admits that he cannot demonstrate or analyze this experience, and that words fail him in trying to express it; still, he insists that it exists all the same. Thus he assures his less mystical friend Bellarmin: "I cannot speak of it (the inner peace found in the beauty of nature) but there are indeed hours where the best and most beautiful appears as if in clouds, and the heaven of perfection opens itself to love; there Bellarmin! There think of your being, there bend your knee with me and think of my serenity! But do not forget that I had what you felt, that I saw with eyes what appeared to you only in the clouds”. As if to banish further doubt, Hyperion then declares that he not only believes in or thinks of the beauty characteristic of the one and all, but that he has “seen and gotten to know it”

Given Hölderlin’s abiding Platonic sympathies, it is easy to imagine his reaction to Schiller’s Kantian doctrine. First, he would be disturbed by the limitation of beauty to the realm of appearances; second, he would reject the purely regulative validity of aesthetic judgment; and, third, he would be repelled by Schiller’s definition of beauty because it subordinates the aesthetic to the moral through the concept of freedom. Hölderlin wanted to go beyond all these limits by making aesthetic contemplation the medium for knowledge of being itself.

What Hölderlin wanted to provide is something like a transcendental deduction of the aesthetic ideas by showing how they are a necessary condition for the proper functioning of reason and the understanding. It is only the aesthetic ideas, he suggested, that set the proper limits to these faculties, preventing them from self-destruction and protecting them against skepticism. Reason will not produce anything rational, and the understanding will not create anything understandable, he writes in Hyperion, unless each of these faculties are directed by aesthetic sense. This is because reason and the understanding presuppose but can never experience the idea of the whole. Both of these faculties are essentially discursive or analytical, proceeding from the parts to the whole. They operate effectively, however, only if there is some prior knowledge of the whole, some intuitive or synthetic power that proceeds from the whole to its parts. It is just this synthetic capacity that is provided by aesthetic sense.

Aesthetic sense is necessary in philosophy, Hölderlin believes, chiefly because it is the only means of rescuing reason from skepticism. This view emerges clearly from Hyperion where he suggests that aesthetic sense is immune from doubt because the skeptic himself presupposes it. The source of all the skeptic’s doubts and objections against reason, he explains, is that he has vague sense or feeling for the whole. It is this feeling that allows the skeptic to see that our discursive faculties cannot know the whole, and that they contradict themselves whenever they attempt to do so; but this feeling comes from the skeptic’s own latent aesthetic intuition.

In the preface to the penultimate version of Hyperion he identifies the absolute, or the one and all, with “serene unity, being in the strict sense of the word”. This agrees with his account of the absolute in ‘Urtheil und Seyn.’ However, in the ultimate published version of Hyperion, Hölderlin equates the absolute not with being but beauty, which consists in “the one distinguishing itself” of Heraclitus. This raises a serious question of consistency: How can the one and all be both mere unity and the one distinguishing itself? If it is being alone, then it would be mere unity, subject–object identity. If, however, it is oneness distinguishing itself, then it cannot be just unity, but it must also be unity within difference, the identity of identity and nonidentity. With the first view, Hölderlin seems to have in mind Parmenides; but with the second, he refers us explicitly to Heraclitus. This tension in Hölderlin’s thinking derives from the conflicting sources in his intellectual development. It was the influence of Spinoza that led him to identify the one and all with pure being. If we follow Spinoza, then the absolute is pure unity, the single universal substance, so that any difference between subject and object will be only a difference in attribute or perspective, alternative forms of explanation of one and the same thing. It was the legacy of Plato, Schiller, and Leibniz, however, that pushed Hölderlin toward a view of the absolute as oneness differentiating itself. For these thinkers gave Hölderlin a vision of an animate universe, of a cosmos that changes and evolves as a living being. If the universe is animate, if it is one vast organism, then it should be more than mere oneness; it should be instead oneness separating itself, for organic development involves differentiation, a process by which an inchoate, indeterminate unity becomes an organized and determinate multiplicity. 

Hölderlin eventually resolved this tension in favor of the more vitalist concept of nature. When he did so exactly is not clear. But in his 1799 fragment Grund zum Empedokles he identifies the unity of the subjective and objective with “pure life” rather than with “pure being”. He also makes it clear that pure life is more than unity alone, because life involves the process of growth, organization, or differentiation, the development from the unified, inchoate, and indeterminate into the manifold, organized, and determinate. Indeed, far from the serenity of pure being, Hölderlin now insists that life consists in struggle, a conflict between extremes where each realizes itself only by becoming its opposite, so that the moment of greatest conflict is also that of greatest reconciliation. In the slightly earlier fragment Das Werden im Vergehen Hölderlin also develops an explicitly dynamic concept of the absolute. The “world of all worlds,” “the everything in everything” presents itself “genetically” in the beginning and end of time. The life that manifests itself in time does not consist in being but in a process of becoming that is “between being and non-being” . The same dynamic concept of nature also emerges in the late essay Über die Verfahrungsweise des poetischen Geistes, where Hölderlin maintains that the poetic spirit must grasp the “infinite unity” involved in the interchange between oneness and multiplicity. Here Hölderlin is especially clear that the absolute must be viewed not only as a unity in opposition to difference, but as the whole process by which unity involves opposition and conversely. 

It becomes clear from the Grund zum Empedokles that Hölderlin postulates a special kind of organic connection between the subjective and objective. Their relationship is not purely causal or mechanical. It is not that they are reciprocally cause and effect of one another. Since cause and effect are distinct terms, this is much too dualistic. It is also not accurate to think of them as force and manifestation of one another, if that means that each has an inherent force and complete identity apart from the other and only shows itself upon the stimulus of the other. This too would be much too dualistic. Rather, Hölderlin stresses how both the subjective and objective become what they are only through the other, or how each realizes its nature only through the other. The objective realizes itself as the subjective because nature reaches its perfection in art and human consciousness, which is its highest degree of organization and development. Conversely, the subjective realizes itself as the objective because art attains its perfection in becoming nature, and because human activity realizes its final end only in becoming one again with all of nature. 

- "To be one with everything that lives! With these words virtue lays down its angry armor and the spirit of man its scepter; all thoughts die away before the image of the eternally one world, like the rules of the struggling artist before his Urania; and iron fate renounces its rule. Death fades from the bond of all beings, and inseparability and eternal youth blesses and beautifies the world."


Granted that both Fichte’s and Spinoza’s views have their merits, how is it possible to synthesize them? Hölderlin is most explicit about his solution in the preface to the penultimate version of Hyperion. Here he places each attitude toward nature in a broader historical framework: the innocence—fall— redemption scenario of the Christian tradition, which had been secularized by Kant and Schiller. Following the Genesis myth, Kant and Schiller had seen history as the story of mankind’s struggle to regain paradise, which consists in its original unity with nature. That which had once been given by nature to ancient man would have to be recreated by modern man through his own efforts, through the use of his freedom and reason. While Kant and Schiller realize that their ideal of unity is unattainable, a utopia we can only approach through constant effort, they also stress that the struggle to regain paradise has had one good result: it has led to the development of reason and freedom. This theory of history reappears in Hölderlin, who applied it to the development of the individual as well as mankind. Clearly referring to this view of history in the preface to the penultimate version of Hyperion, he wrote: “Blessed unity, being (das Seyn) in the only sense of the word, is lost for us, and we must lose it, if we should strive to achieve it. We tear ourselves away from the peaceful one and all of the world, so that we can produce it through ourselves." In the final version of the novel the theory often recurs, now formulated in the mantra “Ideal wird, was Natur war”. Placing both Fichte and Spinoza in the context of this theory, Hölderlin saw a clear justification for each attitude toward nature: while Spinoza’s unity with nature represents the lost ideal, Fichte’s concept of striving expresses the struggle to regain paradise.

The historical schema appears biased in favor of Fichte, given that his infinite striving belongs to the future, whereas Spinoza’s unity with nature belongs to the past, the state of original oneness lost forever. But Hölderlin’s synthesis gives a remarkable twist to the historical schema that grants equal validity to both standpoints. Rather than placing one standpoint in the past and the other in the future, Hölderlin thinks that both belong to extreme but recurring phases of individual development, neither of which is more mature and wise than the other. These stages are not progressive, as if one supersedes the other, but they are circular, moving between opposite extremes. Our life consists in an “eccentric orbit,” Hölderlin writes in his Fragment von Hyperion, where we move back and forth between opposing extremes or peripheries but where the essential direction seems to be forever the same. Both of these extremes are found in Hyperion’s life, which constantly oscillates between them. His life is a striking example of the eccentric orbit because the novel ends as it began—with his finding his sense of unity and harmony with nature after failing to recreate the republic of ancient Athens.

Heraclitus & Parmenides 

Making the validity of a philosophy depend on personal choice and experience was Hölderlin’s final trump card in his program to establish the primacy of the aesthetic, the priority of literature over philosophy. If the truth of a philosophy depends on choice, stage of development, or experience, then the conditions of its validity are ultimately better represented in literature than in philosophy, given that it is only in literature that it is possible to portray such personal factors. Hölderlin reached this radical conclusion by taking some of Jacobi’s teachings about the limits of reason and exploiting them in the interests of art rather than religion. Since the first principles of a philosophy are indemonstrable, as Jacobi taught, it follows that the choice of a philosophy cannot depend on reason, and so falls outside the realm of philosophy itself.

Such a radical doctrine seems to make philosophy entirely subjective, as if its validity were a matter of choice alone. This hardly squares with Hölderlin’s own attempt to break outside the limits of Fichte’s subjective idealism, and his insistence on the metaphysical role of the aesthetic. It is important to see, however, that Hölderlin thinks that the eccentric orbit is not only personal but also natural, reflecting not only the spirit of the individual but also the movements of the universe itself. Here, as so often among the romantics, it is crucial to recall that the microcosm is a mirror of the macrocosm, because every individual is inseparable from the organic unity of the universe as a whole. Thus Hölderlin maintains that nature itself has its own dialectical rhythms corresponding to the idealist and realist phases of our personal development. If the idealist phase mirrors nature’s movement from the universal and inchoate to the individual and organized, where all the energies of the universe seem to concentrate themselves in self-consciousness, their highest organization and development, the realist phase corresponds to nature’s movement from the individual and organized back to the universal and inchoate, where the individual disappears and is swallowed up again in the infinite. It is the task of the poet, Hölderlin insists, to represent both these movements as a unity. To achieve this task would be to show how one’s personal development mirrors the movement of the universe itself. That is a demand of a tall order, of course, but Hölderlin’s faith in the sovereignty of the aesthetic requires nothing less.

(Note-to-self: this is very much unfinished)