---
subtitle:
date: 2023-09-04
tags: Ancient-Greece
---

# The Homeric Gods
 
## Introductory Remarks

(Note-to-self: To be added pages one and two here) 

The worldliness and naturalness with which the religion of the Greeks is reproached is encountered in their plastic art also. Here too the difference from the oriental is immeasurable. Organic structure takes the place of monstrosity; instead of symbolism and denotation we have what we have learned-through the Greeks- to understand as forms of nature. And yet all of these works breathe a loftiness and nobility which lifts us above the transitory and earthbound world of facts. Before our eyes a miracle takes place: the natural has become one with the spiritual and eternal, without surrendering a whit of its abundance, warmth, and immediacy in the amalgam. Should not the spirit for which exact observance of the natural led to the vision of the eternal and infinite have made the religion of the Greeks the very thing it was?

In Homer, of course, nothing happens without the god concerned manifesting himself. But despite this remarkable proximity of the divine, everything takes its natural course. We hear, indeed we see in lifelike imagery, how a god whispers a saving device to a baffled warrior at the right instant, we hear that he rouses spirit and kindles courage, that he makes limbs supple and nimble and gives a right arm accuracy and strength. But if we look more closely at the occasions when these divine interventions take place, we find that they always come at the critical moment when human powers suddenly converge, as if charged by electric contact, on some insight, some resolution, some deed. These decisive turns which, as every attentive observer knows, are regularly experienced in an active life, the Greeks regarded as manifestations of the gods. Not only the flow of events with its critical moments, however, but also duration itself indicated the divine. In all larger forms and conditions of life and existence the Greek perceived the eternal visage of divinity. Taken all together these essences constituted the holiness of the world. Hence the Homeric poems are filed with divine proximity and presence as are those of no other people or age. In their world the divine is not superimposed as a sovereign power over natural events; it is revealed in the forms of the natural, as their very essence and being. For other peoples miracles take place; but a greater miracle takes place in the spirit of the Greek, for he is capable of so regarding the objects of daily experience that they can display the awesome lineaments of the divine without losing a whit of their natural reality. Here we perceive the spiritual tendency of the people destined to teach mankind to investigate nature,- both within and around man; the Greek approach, that is to say, first gave mankind the idea of nature which is so familiar to modern man.

From experience, history, and anthropology we learn that the world may present itself to man's mind and emotion in manifold guises. Among possible modes of perceiving and thinking, two in particular stand out and claim our attention because neither is wholy wanting in any place or age, diverse as their apparent significance may be. The one we may call the objective or - if the word be not limited to the sense of the calculating intellect - the rational. Its object is the reality of nature, and its aim is to apprehend the substance of nature in all directions and to regard its forms and laws with reverence. The other mode of thought is the magical. It always has to do with the dynamic; power and action are its basic categories, and therefore it seeks and reveres the extraordinary.

The domain of nature is interrupted by the intervention of the tremendous, at which point the sphere of limitless powers and effects, the domain of quivering dread or joy, takes its inception. The matter which is here offered for admiration and worship is unintelligible and formless. It is completely sovereign in its opposition to the world of experience, and its only correspondence lies in the magic power of human emotions. From this point of view nothing in the natural world is firmly fixed. The properties of things undergo limitless change; anything may turn into anything.

Indeed, when we today utter the word nature in the large and vital sense in which Goethe used it, we are in the debt of the Greek spirit. The natural can therefore of itself stand in the glory of the sublime and divine. This does not, however, mean the appearance of a force with limitless power; it does mean that existence manifests itself in infinitely various living expressions as the essence of our world. First and highest is not the power that acts, but the being that is manifested in the form of the act. And the holiest shudder comes not from the tremendous and infinitely powerful, but rather from the depths of natural experience. This concept of the world which we call specifically Greek found its first and greatest expression in the age whose monuments are the Homeric poems. It is recognizable at once by the almost complete absence of the magical element. Goethe represents Faust as uttering a wish at the end of his life:

- All magic - from my path if I could spurn it, All incantation - once for all unlearn it,To face you, Nature, as one man of men- It would be worth it to be human then.

Nowhere but in the Greek world is this wish fulfilled; it is in the Greek spirit that nature, before which Faust wished to stand with nothing foreign interposed, was transformed into idea.

However much we may ascribe to the poet's own rich thought and taste in his presentation of divine manifestations, the natural idealism or ideal naturalism which astonishes and enchants us in these manifestations remains the basic character of this new and in a true sense Greek religion. The ancient Greek religion comprehended the things of this world with the most powerful sense of reality possible, and nevertheless -nay, for that very reason-recognized in them the marvellous delineations of the divine. It does not revolve upon the anxieties, longings, and spiritual broodings of the human soul: its temple is the world, from whose vitality and movement emanates its knowledge of the divine. 

We shall not let ourselves be deterred by the officious judgments of zealots and pedants who charge Homeric religion with immorality or primitive crudeness because its gods are partial and at odds and sometimes indulge in conduct that is outlawed in bourgeois ethies. To be sure, Greek philosophers also engaged in this kind of criticism, but the fact that the pious sense of nature could fade even in Hellenism does not justify such criticism. For pious naturalism many things are true and important which may seem foolish and wicked to theorists and moralizers. 

In ancient Greek worship there is revealed to us one of humanity's greatest religious ideas - we make bold to say the religious idea of the European spirit. The faculty which in other religions is constantly being thwarted and inhibited here flowers forth with the admirable assurance of genius-the faculty of seeing the world in the light of the divine, not a world yearned for, aspired to, or mysticaly present in rare ecstatic experiences, but the world into which we were born, part of which we are, interwoven with it through our senses and, through our minds, obligated to it for all its abundance and vitality. Zeus, Apollo, Athena, Artemis, Dionysus, Aphrodite - wherever the ideas of the Greek spirit are honored, there we must never forget that these were its greatest ideas, indeed in a sense the totality of its ideas in general; and they will endure as long as the European spirit, which in them has attained its most significant objectivation, is not wholy subjugated to the spirit of the Orient or to that of utilitarian rationality.

It is an unfortunate superstition of our age that thoughts concerning the world arise out of the necessities of the many, only to attain solitary heights in the minds of the few. It is rather among rare and spiritually gifted men-whether in groups or individuals-that they are born, only to be abased and to sink to the point where they become meager, dull, and crude, and are finally rigidified. Only an age spiritually poor could believe that popular religious usages and ideas have never had meaning beyond the capacities of a simple man's thought and experience.

## Religion and Myth in High Antiquity

The Homeric poems are based upon a clear and unified view of the world. They give evidence of this view at almost every verse, for every significant thing they say is associated with it and through this association receives its peculiar character. For them no part of life is wholy without the divine. The religious outlook of the Homeric poems is clear and self-contained. It never speaks through conceptual formulization in the way of dogma, but is expressed as avital force in everything that happens or is said or thought. The divine, presented with such clarity in the Homeric poems, is manifold in form and yet everywhere consistent. Alofty spirit, a noble content, is expressed in all of its forms. It is not the purpose of the poems to communicate any religious revelation, to give force to any religious doctrine. They desire only to behold, and in the joy of beholding to fashion forms; before them lie all the riches of the world, earth and heaven, water and air, trees, animals, men and gods.

The events of the Aeschylean tragedy are of paramount significance, they celebrate the institution of the Athenian court for cases of murder, by means of which the law and authority of the state supplants the bloody expiation of the old order. Apollo, the Olympian god, is utterly repelled by the ghastly ghouls who gorge on human gore and celebrate their grisly rites at sites of torture and savagery.

One must never overlook the fact that it is most intimately connected with consciousness of generally valid norms which limit the personal will of the individual. It is not willfulness when an unhappy man cals miprecations upon his oppressor, an insulted father or abused mother upon a son, an elder upon a ruthless younger. These are the very cases where, according to the old view of the world, the wrathful deities rose up. In their own abode underground they are called "spirits of curse" (Arai). The curse of a man violently oppressed and the demonic vengeance of a violated world order are basically one and the same thing. So the pauper and beggar is a person to be revered, and when he is pitilessly repelled from the table of the rich or even roughly handled, then the vengeance of the Erinyes who stand at the beggar's side is visited upon the proud miscreants. 

The ancient group of sanctities thus also includes obligations to the needy, the unprotected, to those astray. The feeling that the eternal powers must be angry with failure to sympathize receives lively expression in the Iliad also. Dying Hector utters it and on his lips it is tantamount to a curse. He had adjured Achilles by all that is sacred not to cast his body out for dogs to devour but to deliver it to his parents for decent burial in return for a rich ransom. But in vain. Now with his last breath he says "You have a heart of iron. Take care that I be not made the gods' curse upon you." And in fact Apollo, to whom Hector's last words allude, threatens with the anger of the gods the pitiless man who drags his victim's body behind his chariot, and he does so because Achilles "dishonors the dumb earth in his fury."

In the earth-religion death does not separate a man from the community of the living. He becomes only the more powerful and respected. He dwells in maternal earth-in Athens he was anciently called Demetrius, that is, belonging to Demeter -and there he receives the prayers and offerings of the living, and from there sends blessings up to them. On certain days when the earth loosens up and new life sprouts, the dead all return and are festively received until their visit is terminated. Of this usage the civilization of the Homeric epic is no longer aware. In it cremation of the dead is assumed. This doubtless involves the difference in thought concerning the dead-one of the most characteristic distinctions of the new religion from the old; the dead do not, indeed, cease to be, but their being is no longer that of the living and there is no longer any connection between the two spheres. Furthermore the sphere of the dead has lost its sanctity; the gods belong wholy to life and are by their essence separated from all that is death's. The Olympian deities have nothing to do with the dead; indeed it is expressly said of them that they shudder before the dark realm of death.

So in the religions of primitive peoples, of which there is much to remind us here, the masculine divinity of heaven often remains in the background. We realize that the age of the fantastic narrative myth is over. In the new age, which conceives the essence of the world and of human life in lofty figures, myth no longer enjoys the sovereign independence and capacity for the fabulous which it had possessed in the prehistoric period. None has so completely overcome magic in its characteristic world of thought as has the Greek. In the Homeric world, magic possesses no importance, whether we look at gods or men, and the few cases where knowledge of magic is indicated only go to show how remote it had become. The gods do not practice enchantment, even though at times they bring things to pass in a manner reminiscent of ancient magic. Their might, like their essence, is based not on magical power, but on the being of nature. "Nature" is the great new word which the matured Greek spirit opposed to ancient magic. From here the path leads directly to the arts and to the sciences of the Greeks. 

The most miraculous happening in the world and the most astonishing and magical capacity of higher beings-such are the images and thoughts by which the spirit was at one time filled. But the new spirit looks into existence with different eyes. For it, not happening and capacity are most important, but being. The nature finds its perfect and eternal expression. With this step ancient myth is abolished, magic overcome, and the gods are finally separated from the elemental.

## Athena

Worship of Athena can apparently be traced back to the early period. Her name itself points to a source outside the Greek range, to which neither its root syllable nor its word-form can belong.In the poetic accounts of her birth she is represented as mighty in battle. "Zeus himself," we read in Hesiod's Theogony, "gave birth from his own head to owl-eyed Tritogeneia, the awful, the strife-stirring, the host-leader ... who delights in tumults and wars and battles. Pindar's lines with reference to the island of Rhodes are majestic:

- Where once the high king of the gods drenched their city in a gold snowfall, when, by the artifice of Hephaestus, at the stroke of the bronze-heeled axe Athena sprang from the height of her father's head with astrong cry. The sky shivered before her and earth our mother.

The twenty-eighth Homeric Hymn presents a truly grand picture of her nature and her first appearance among the gods:

- I begin to sing of Pallas Athena, the glorious goddess, owl-eyed, inventive, unbending of heart, pure virgin, savior of cities, courageous, Tritogeneia. From his awful head wise Zeus himself bore her arrayed in warlike arms of flashing gold, and awe seized all the gods as they gazed. But Athena sprang quickly from the immortal head and stood before Zeus who holds the aegis, shaking asharp spear: great Olympus began to reel horribly at the might of the owl-eyed goddess, and earth round about cried fearfully, and the sea was moved and tossed with dark waves, while foam burst forth suddenly: the bright son of Hyperion stopped his swift-footed horses a long while, until the maiden Palas Athena had stripped the heavenly armor from her immortal shoulders. And wise Zeus was glad.

Her effects upon the world of men and her manifestations in it are celebrated by poets and artists. First of all it is the warriors whose courage she kindles. Before battle begins they sense her inspiriting presence and yearn to perform heroic deeds worthy of her. In hte lliad she sweeps, brandishing her fearful aegis, through the armed companies of the Greeks, urging them to battle; only a little while ago they were jubilant at the thought of returning home-now all that is forgotten; the spirit of the goddess causes all hearts to thrill with battle glee." In all the descriptions Athena's presence alone is effective; she does not actively participate. So she is shown in the famous pediment reliefs of the temple of Aphaia in Aegina: she stands fuly armed but in attitude of repose in the midst of the warriors.

Her enmity towards Ares, which breaks out repeatedly in the Iliad, permits us to understand something of her own nature. In the famous battle of the gods in the twenty-first book she crushes the war god down to earth with little effort. Ares' partisanship for the Trojans is alleged to be the cause of this hatred, but we feel plainly that there is adeeper cause, rooted in the opposition between their natures. Ares is sketched as a bloodthirsty, raging demon, whose confidence in victory is nothing more than braggadocio compared to the rational power of an Athena. 

The grandeur which ennobles the deeds of Heracles and makes them the paradigm for the heroic course that conquers heaven is the expression of Athena's spirit. The nearness of the divine at the moment of severest trial is perhaps nowhere presented to our eyes more compellingly than by the creator of the Atlas metope of the temple of Zeus at Olympia. The arch of heaven rests heavily upon the neck of the hero, threatening to crush him; but unnoticed the bright and noble figure of Athena has stepped up behind him, and with the indescribable dignity of posture which is the hallmark of Greek divinity she gently touches the burden-and Heracles, who cannot see her, feels that his strength is gigantic and is able to perform the impossible. 

With this we may compare the story of the death of Tydeus, which was told in a lost poem. To this hero too Athena was a faithful companion, and at the end of his lifespan she even wished to make him immortal. As he lay fatally wounded, she approached him with the potion of eternal life, but he was on the point of wrenching open the skull of his slain opponent, to gulp the brain out of its pan in his cannibalistic rage. The goddess was repelled by this sight and turned back, and the protégé for whom she intended the supreme distinction sank into the common lot of death, for he had degraded himself. It is a mistake to believe that the Athena known to the Iliad was oblivious to such regard for moral factors. Conduct like that of Tydeus is unthinkable for any friend of Athena in the Iliad. The goddess who recalls Achilles to reason and dignity at the right moment is none other than she who is revolted by and turns away from a Tydeus dehumanized in dying. And she is not merely the admonisher: she herself is properly the decision, specifically on the side of reason against mere passion. Achilles himself pondered whether he should strike or restrain himself. "Even as he pondered and was drawing the sword from its scabbard" Athena suddenly touched him. The sense of her coming is the victory of reason. This describes her better than long discussions of her nature can do.

What Athena shows man, what she desires of him, and what she inspires him to, is boldness, will to victory, courage. But all of this is nothing without directing reason and illuminating clarity. These are the true fountainheads of worthy deeds, and it is they which complete the nature of the goddess of victory. This light of hers illumines not alone the warrior in battle: wherever in a life of action and heroism great things must be wrought, perfected, and struggled for, there Athena is present. Broad indeed is the spirit of a battle-loving people when it recognizes the same perfection wherever a clear and intelligent glance shows the path to achievement, and when no mere maid of battle can be adequate. Athena is the splendor of the serene and powerful moment to which consummation must fly, just as the winged Victory flies to the victor with its wreath from the hands of the goddess. She is the ever-near whose word and whose lightning glance encounter the hero at the right moment and summon him to his most intelligent and manly prowess. Here our thoughts inevitably turn to Apollo, Hermes, and Artemis, and we are compelled to compare them with Athena.

Just as Apollo is the god of distance and as such the god of purity and of cognition, so is Athena the goddess of nearness. In this she resembles Hermes. Like him she acts as guide to her favorites, and at times both she and Hermes accompany the same hero. And yet there is a world of difference between their modes of guidance. In Hermes we recognize divine presence and direction as the wonderful windfall of sudden gain, finding, snatching, and irresponsible enjoyment. Athena, on the other hand, is the heavenly presence and direction as illumination and inspiration to victorious comprehension and consummation. To Hermes belongs what is clandestine, twilit, uncanny; Athena is bright as day. Dreaminess, yearning, languishing, are alien to her. Of the tender raptures of love she knows nothing. "All creatures in heaven and on earth," says the Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite, "pay homage to the goddess of love, but with Athena her power ceases." In Homer and Hesiod she is called Pallas, "the maid," and in Athens she bears the famous name "the Virgin" (Parthenos). Her disinclination to love and marriage suggests a likeness to Artemis, but here again the greatest profit in the comparison is that it underscores the essential difference. In Artemis maidenhood has a tart, shy, disdaining character which fends love off; in Athena maidenhood is the spirit of action. It is in her nature to associate with men, to think of them always, always to be near them, in order to reveal herself to them in moments of life which differ from the erotic not by shy aloofness but by the strength and clarity of energetic action. Athena is a woman, and yet it is as if she were a man.

In Apollo we recognize the wholy masculine man. The aristocratic aloofness, the superiority of cognition, the sense of proportion, these and other related traits in a man, even music in the broadest sense of the word, are, in the last analysis, alien to a woman. Apollo is all these things. But perfection in the living present, untrammelled and victorious action, not in the service of some remote and infinite idea but for mastery over the moment-that is the triumph which has always delighted woman in a man, to which she inspires him, and whose high satisfaction he can learn from her. The divine precision of the well-planned deed, the readiness to be forceful and merciless, the unflagging will to victory-this, paradoxical as it may sound, is woman's gift to man, who by nature is indifferent to the momentary and strives for the infinite. So we understand the femininity of a divine being who nevertheless stands wholy on the side of man. She does, in addition, denote the conquest of coarseness and barbarity by the nobility of the beautiful, but there is never any admixture of softness and gentleness. Neither wisdom nor vision, neither devotion nor pleasure is her will. Consummation, the immediate present, action here and now-that is Athena.

No more than other genuine divinities can Athena be understood from a single and particularly striking activity. The powerful mind which made her the genius of victory extends to a breadth far beyond the range of the battlefield. Only the bright-eyed intelligence" capable of discerning the decisive element at every juncture and of supplying the most effective instrumentality is an adequate characterization of her ideal with its multiplicity of vital functions.

When we imagine the presence of the goddess, this spirit of brightest vigilance which grasps with lightning speed what the instant requires, which always and with serenity never troubled devises counsel and encounters the most difficult tasks with poised and ready energy-we can think of no better mark and symbol for such a being than the bright and luminous glance of the eye.

The true Athena is neither a savage nor a contemplative being; she is equaly remote from both dispositions. Her fighting spirit is no impulsive drive, her bright mind no pure reason. She represents a world of action, not, however, unconsidered and brute, but reasonable action which through her clear awareness will most surely lead to victory. It is victory, indeed, which makes her world perfect. In Hesiods' Shield of Heracles she herself springs up to Heracles upon his chariot, "holding victory and glory in her divine hands." Thus she is present at every manly struggle that possesses greatness. But man must know that greatness and triumph are manifestations of the divine. Whoever rejects the goddess and relies only upon his own strength will fall miserably through that same divine power. Belief in Athena arose from no individual need or individual longing of human life. She is the meaning and actuality of a complete and self-contained world-the clear, hard, glorious masculine world of design and fulfillment whose delight is in struggle. This world includes the feminine also. Not, however, as lover or mother, not as dancing girl or Amazon, but as a knowledgeable and artistically constructive nature does woman belong to Athena. For she is spirited immediacy, redeeming spiritual presence, swift action. She is the ever-near.

## Apollo

Description of Apollo demands the highest style - an exaltation above everything human.

Next after Zeus, Apollo is the most important Grek god. Even as early as in Homer there can be no doubt of this fact. Apollo cannot be imagined as making any appearance without demonstrating his superiority, and in more than one case his epiphany is truly grandiose. His voice resounds with the majesty of thunder when he bids raging Diomedes halt? His encounters with the mighty and the proud become a symbol for the perish- ability of all beings earthly, even the greatest, before the presence of deity. As long as humanity retains a feeling for the divine, no reader will fail to be stirred by the picture of Apollo striding into Patroclus's path and shattering him in the midst of his charge. We have the premonition that it is he before whom the most brilliant of all heroes, Achilles, will be crushed. It is with reference to both those great dooms that the speaking horse Xanthus cals Apollo "the mightiest of the gods."

The greatness of this Homeric Apollo is ennobled by loftiness of spirit. And so artists in the post-Homeric centuries strove emulously to make his likeness a vivid representation of what is loftiest, most eminent, and at the same time brightest.

Myth calls Apollo and Artemis brother and sister. We do not know how they came to be associated, but their historical figures resemble one another as closely as only brother and sister can, and the deeper we penetrate into their character the more significant this resemblance becomes. What appeared to be disparateness soon proves to be the necessary diversity between the sexes, and in the end there is revealed a divine being in twofold expression, whose agreements and oppositions in some marvellous and ingenious fashion constitute acomplete world. According to Plutarch and others, Phoebus means "pure" and "holy," and they are indubitably right. Artemis is the only one of the heavenly deities whom Homer honors with the epithet hagne, which means "holy" and "pure." The same attribute is given to Apollo by Aeschylus and Pindar. In both deities there is something mysterious and unapproachable, something that commands an awed distance. 

The Delphian myth makes his resort the fabulous land of the Hyperboreans, of which, from early times, much was said in Delos also. "No ship and no traveller can reach that land." There dwell the holy people that know neither sickness nor old age, for whom trouble and struggle do not exist. 

When Apollo was born, Zeus gave him a chariot with swans, upon which he rode not to Delphi but to the Hyperboreans; the Delphians summoned him with chants, but he remained with the Hyperboreans for a whole year. But when the time came, he permitted his swans to take the road to Delphi. It was summer, and the nightingales sang to him, and the swallows and cicadas as well; the fount of Castaly bubbled forth silvern, and Cephisus swelled with darkling waves. Thus Alcaeus. And as the god came on that occasion, so he came regularly with the warm season of the year, and brought song and prophecy. His remoteness is uncommonly illuminating for the nature of Apollo. If we compare him with Athena, the great difference between them becomes clear instantaneously. Just as she is the ever-near, so is he the withdrawn. He accompanies no hero sa faithful friend, as ever-ready helper and counsellor. He is not, as Athena is, a spirit of immediacy, of clever and energetic mastery over the moment. His chosen ones are not the men of action.

In a vigorous speech, Poseidon had challenged him to a duel, and with noble pride he calmly replies: "You would have me be without measure and without prudence, if I ma to fight for insignificant mortals, who now flourish like leaves of the trees and then fade away and are dead." And when his sister Artemis, with true feminine temper, reproaches him as a coward, he steps aside in silence. Is this not the god of Pindar, the promulgator of insight, of self-knowledge, of measure, and of intelligent order? "What are we?" says Pindar in Apollo's spirit; "... The shadow of a dream is man, no more. But when the brightness comes, and God gives it, there is a shining of light on men, and their life is sweet."" Nothing so clearly defines that attitude whose ideal the post-Homeric Apollo made present to men's eyes as does the notion of sophrosyne, with which his speech in Homer begins. "Know thyself," he calls out to the visitors at his Delphian temple. This means, know what man is, and how great is the interval which separates him from the greatness of the eternal gods; consider the limitations of humanity. "Take care, son of Tydeus, give back; measure yourself no longer against the gods, for not of the same breed are the gods immortal and men who walk on the ground." And in the last book of the Iliad, Apollo rises with the pathos of restraining reason and magnanimity in order to put a stop to the inhumanity of Achilles who for twelve days has been abusing the corpse of Hector. Before the gods he charges him with ruthlessness and hardness of heart: he lacks respect for the eternal laws of nature, and the self-restraint which is seemly for the noble even after grievous bereavement. "Great as he is, let him take care not to make us angry, for in his fury he does dishonor to the dumb earth." The gods approve his words. Such is the Homeric Apollo; manifestation of spiritual loftiness is part of his essence and not a later addition to his picture. 

Only when we appreciate what purity and purification can mean in the Apollonian sense, will the true character of his spiritual stature become intelligible. We realize at once that to this spirituality belongs Apollonian music, knowledge of right and of the future, institution of higher ordinances. All these qualities characterize the Homeric Apollo. We sense that these properties and perfections radiate from a single basic quality and are manifold manifestations of a single divine being which the Greeks had worshipped as Apollo even before Homer. But we must examine them in detail fi we wish a nearer approach to the sense of the whole and the one.

For us it is strange to find ideas of purification associated with a god to whom spiritual quality is attributed, because modern religious scholarship has accustomed us to understand ancient ritual in a wholly materialistic sense. From this prejudice we must resolve to free ourselves, for it only transfers our own mode of thought to the situation of more primitive humanity whose peculiarity it is our purpose to explain... If, according to this conception, contact and pollution are more than merely material, their operation affects the whole man and not only imperils his physical nature but may also burden and corrupt his mental state... Here there can be no thought of moral guilt, and therefore it has been deemed just to assume that the entire nature of expiation in its specific sense had to do only with the outer, not with the inner, man... To be sure, in one important point this primitive conception diverges sharply from our own reasonable mode of thought. For the consequences of the deed it makes no difference whether it was intentional or involuntary, whether it was committed under duress or was self-willed. Everywhere, according to ancient belief, man must suffer for things he did not intend. Who shall say that this is untrue? Who shall make bold to call it unjust?

Apollo therefore advises men in distress what is to be done and what left undone, where atonement and submission may be necessary. Once on a time, it is said, he himself required purification of the blood of the Delphian dragon. But the Homeric Apollo reveals a higher mode of purity, the mode which he so impressively promulgated from Delphi along with prescriptions for atonement, and this should warn us against understanding Apollonian purification in too superficial a sense. It is through clarification of inward being that man should guard against the dangers he can avoid. More than this: the god sets up an ideal of outward and inner attitudes which, quite apart from consequences, may have validity as purity in a higher sense.

The god who induces such a declaration of faith is also the founder of the ordinances which give human society its proper form. Upon his authority states establish their legal institutions. He shows colonists their way to a new homeland. He is the patron of young people entering into manhood, the leader in the stages of adult life, the guide of noble and manly athletics. At his most important festivals it was mainly the boys and youths who made their appearance. 

So Pindar sings of the heavenly power of Apollonian music:

- Golden lyre, held of Apollo in common possession with the violet-haired Muses: the dance steps, leaders of festival, heed you; the singers obey your measures when, shaken with music, you cast the beat to lead choirs of dancers. You have power to quench the spread thunderbolt of flowinf fire. Zeus' eagle sleeps on his staff, folding his quick wings both ways to quiet, lord of birds; you shed a mist on his hooked head, dark and gentle closure of eyes; dreaming, he ripples his lithe back, bound in spell of your waves. Violent Ares even, leaving aside the stern pride of spears, makes gentle his heart in sleep. Your shafts enchant the divinities by grace of the wisdom of Leto's son and the deep-girdled muses. 

Moderation and beauty are the essence and the efect of this music. It restrains all that is wild; even predatory beasts of the wilderness are charmed by it. We know that the Greeks habitually pictured recognition of what is right under the image of an accurate bow-shot. The simile is directly illuminating. But we find it strange to equate music and song with the art of hitting the mark, for in the latter case we do not think of what is right and of recognition. That then is the point where the nature of Apollonian music must be made accessible to us. The song of the most alert of all gods does not arise dreamlike out of an intoxicated soul but flies directly towards a clearly seen goal, the truth, and the rightness of its aim is a sign of its divinity. Out of Apollo's music there resounds divine recognition. In everything it perceives and attains form.

- Where, oh where do they shine, the oracles distantly striking? Delphi slumbers, and where does the glorious destiny sound?

(Note-to-self: Compare to Bacchus music slaves. What is right and recognition bow and arrow. To kill, power, aim focus. Direct. Truth. Not intoxicated drunk but directful. Divine.) 

Apollo is the most Greek of all gods. fI the Greek spirit found its first formulation in the Olympian religion, then it is Apollo whose form most clearly manifests it. Apollonian desiderates clarity and form, and hence distance. He desires not soul but spirit. Just as Apollo himself never emphasizes his personality and never, by his Delphian oracles, claims praise and honor for himself beyond all others, so he is oblivious to the eternal worth of the human individual and the single soul. The sense of his manifestation is that it directs a man's attention not to the worth of his ego and the profound inwardness of his individual soul, but rather to what transcends the personal, to the unchangeable, to the eternal forms. 

What Pindar, in the spirit of Apollo, impresses upon his hearers is not a mystical doctrine of ablessed or unhappy beyond, but the thing that separates gods and men from one another. Both may nideed have the same primal mother, but man is fleeting and vain, and only the heavenly beings endure forever." The life of man glides away like a shadow, and if it shine, it is a light from above that gilds it. Man must therefore not presume to equality with the gods but should recognize his limitations and remember that earth will be his garment. The crown of life, which even mortals may attain, is the memory of his virtues. Not his person but a more important thing, the spirit of his perfections and creations, prevails over death and soars in song, eternally young, from generation to generation. For only the form belongs to the realm of the imperishable.

It proclaims the presence of the divine not in the miracles of a supernatural power, not in the rigor of na absolute justice, not in the providence of an infinite love, but in the victorious splendor of clarity, in the intelligent sway of order and moderation.

## Artemis 

Unmistakably, the essence of Apollo is specifically masculine. Spiritual freedom and distance are qualities of the male. But it is also masculine to doubt one's self. A man who has overcome the constraint of nature has also forfeited its motherly protection, and only the strong spirit of his god can help him stand fast and abide in the light. Here Artemis confronts us with freedom of another sort - the fem inine. The mirror of this divine femininity is nature - not the great holy mother who gives birth to all life, sustains it, and in the end receives it back into her bosom, but nature of a quite different sort, which we might call virginal, free nature with its brilliance and wildness, with its guiltless purity and its uncanniness. This nature is maternal indeed, and shows tender solicitude, but it is of the true nature of a maiden, and as such disdainful, hard, and cruel.

Here is a teeming concourse of elements, flora and fauna, life unnumbered which sprouts, blooms, spreads its scent, bubbles, hops, leaps, flutters, soars, and sings; na infinity of sympathy and discord, pairing and struggle, rest and feverish movement, and yet all is related, interwoven, and borne by a single life-spirit, and the quiet visitor senses the higher presence with the awe of the indescribable. Here the people whose religion we begin to grasp found the divine. To them not the fearful majesty of the sinless judge of conscience but the purity of the untouched element was holiest. And they felt that man, this questionable creature that mirrors, doubts, and condemns itself, that has long lost its peace through so much distress and so much striving, could only with diffidence thrust himself into the chaste environs where the divine hovered and held sway. The divine seemed to breathe in the enveloping splendor of mountain meadows, in river and seas and the smiling limpidness that hung over all. And at luminous moments suddenly the form appeared, agod or agoddess, now like a man, now nearer the monstrous, like an animal. The solitudes of nature possess geniuses of diverse form, from the fearful and wild to the shy spirit of sweet maidenhood. But loftiest of all is an encounter with the sublime. It dwels in the clear ether of the mountain peak, in the golden iridescence of mountain meadows, in the lightning glint of ice-crystals and snowy slopes, in the silent astonishment of field and forest when the moonlight bathes them in its glow and drips glittering from the leaves.

This is the divine spirit of sublime nature, the lofty shimmering mistress, the pure one, who compels delight and yet cannot love, the dancer and huntress who fondles cubs in her bosom and races the deer, who brings death when she draws her golden bow, reserved and unapproachable like wild nature, and yet, like nature, wholy enchantment and fresh excitement and lightning beauty. This is Artemis. Manifold as her manifestations may be, in this idea they possess their unity and are no longer contradictory.

The François vase, which was made in Athens about half a century before the birth of Aeschylus and Pindar, shows her lifting a lion by the scruff with either hand, as if they were cats; and again, grasping apanther with one hand and with the other holding astag by the throat. No poet speaks so movingly of her care for wild beasts as does Aeschylus in his Agamemnon.

But how different is the sense of distance and purity in Apollo! How different the symbols by which the creative spirit has fashioned them! For Apollo freedom and distance denote a spiritual quality-the will to clarity and form; with him purity denotes release from constricting and oppressive forces. For Artemis, on the other hand, these are ideals of physical existence, just as purity in her case is understood in the sense of virginity. Her will does not pursue spiritual freedom but nature and its elemental freshness, mobility, and development.

She is life and being, starry-bright, sparkling, blinding, mobile, whose sweet strangeness draws man on the more irresistibly the more disdainfully it dismisses him; an essence crystal-clear, which is nevertheless intertwined with the dark roots in all animate nature; a being childishly simple and yet incalculable, sweetly amiable and diamond-hard; girlishly demure, fleeting, elusive, and suddenly brusque and contrary; playing, frolicking, dancing, and in a flash most inexorably serious; lovingly anxious and tenderly solicitous, with the enchantment of a smile that out- weighs perdition, and yet wild to the point of gruesomeness and cruel to the point of repulsiveness. all of these are traits of the free, withdrawn nature to which Artemis belongs, and in her the piously intuitive spirit has learned to perceive this eternal image of sublime femininity as a thing divine. 

## Aphrodite 

Every earthly Venus arises like heaven's first, A dark birth out of the endless sea.


Of her gifts all ages speak with ravishment. First of all, naturally, is her beauty and her compelling charm (charis). From her comes that all-powerful yearning which can forget the whole world for the sake of the one beloved, that can shatter honorable bonds and break sacred faith only to melt into oneness with him. She herself is of course the most beautiful of women-not maidenly, like Artemis, and not dignified, like the goddesses of marriage and motherhood, but pure feminine beauty and loveliness itself, bathed in the moist glow of ecstasy, always fresh and untroubled and blissful as the infinite sea which gave her birth. Plastic art strove to grasp this image of love come alive. Poets after Homer call her "golden" and speak of her as the "smiling" goddess. Helen recognizes her by the ravishing beauty of her neck and bosom and by the brilliance of her eyes, just as Achilles recognizes Athena by her mighty, flaming glance."

- Guest-loving girls! servants of Suasion in wealthy Corinth! Ye that burn the golden tears of fresh frankincense, full often soaring upward in your souls unto Aphrodite, the heavenly mother of loves! She hath granted you, ye girls, blamelessly to cull on lovely couches the blossom of delicate bloom; for, under force, all things are fair.

For us the Aphrodite who comes from the Orient sharpens the lineaments of the Greek manifestation of her. In her aparticular and magnificent form of existence is regarded as divine. Because she denotes apermanent reality which draws everything into her power, and bestows her spirit and impresses her character upon the whole realm of the elemental and the living, she is a world - and for the Greeks this means a divinity. And what is the quality of this eternal being? It is the ensnaring, heart-winning splendor in which all things and the whole world stand before the eye of love, the rapture of propinquity and fusion into oneness, whose magic draws the contact of limited creatures into boundless dissolution. It manifests itself as true divinity ranging from the natural up to the sublime heights of spirit.

Here the realm of Aphrodite apparently approaches that of Hermes. But her favor has nothing of the luck of happy chance, of coincidence, of windfal. It is a benison, a grace, which resides in beauty and charm and wins every victory, without effort, because bliss produces bliss in others - "What is beautiful appears blissful in itself," as Mörike has written. The gift of consummation and understanding, of conquest and rejoicing, is at its most sublime in the world of thought and of song. But Aphrodite's realm is of another sort and much more comprehensive. Here the notion of divine essence and power proceeds not from the desiring subject, but from the beloved object. Aphrodite is not the loving one: she is beauty and smiling charm; she enraptures. Not the urge to take possession comes first, but rather the magic of an appearance that draws irresistibly into the ravishment of union. The secret of the totality and unity of the world of Aphrodite is that in her attraction there is at work no demonic force which makes an unfeeling man seize his prey. The bewitching one is eager to surrender, the image of loveliness voluntarily bends towards the love-stricken with an undisguised yearning which is itself irresistible. 

This divine rapture, by which what was separated finds unity in love, was turned, long after the ancient world-myth had faded, into acohesive force in a new concept of the cosmos. Thus for Empedocles it is the same Aphrodite who causes human hearts to beat for one another and who produces perfect harmony and unity in great world-periods. But in closing we must again remind ourselves that to the breadth of this realm which is the world there belong also the horrible and the destructive. No power can cause such strife and confusion as can that whose office is the most luminous and blissful harmony; and it is only by these dark shadows that Aphrodite's magic brightness becomes acomplete creation.

## Hermes 

Hermes, "the friendliest of the gods to men," is a genuine Oylmpian. His essence possesses the freedom, the breadth, and the brilliance by which we recognize the realm of Zeus. And yet he has properties which set him apart from the circle of the children of Zeus and which, when they are closely examined, appear to belong to a different and older conception of deity. If we compare Hermes with his brother Apollo or with Athena we notice a certain lack of dignity in him.

Aman who is awake in the open field at night or who wanders over silent paths experiences the world differently than by day. Nighness vanishes, and with it distance; everything is equaly far and near, close by us and yet mysteriously remote. Space loses its measures. There are whispers and sounds, and we do not know where or what they are. Our feelings too are peculiarly ambiguous. There is a strangeness about what is intimate and dear, and a seductive charm about the frightening. There is no longer a distinetion between the lifeless and the living, everything is animate and soulless, vigilant and asleep at once. What the day brings on and makes recognizable gradually, emerges out of the dark with no intermediary stages. The encounter suddenly confronts us, as if by a miracle: What is the thing we suddenly see - an enchanted bride, a monster, or merely a log? Everything teases the traveller, puts on a familiar face and the next moment is utterly strange, suddenly terrifies with awful gestures and immediately resumes a familiar and harmless posture.

Danger lurks everywhere. Out of the dark jaws of the night which gape beside the traveller, any moment a robber may emerge without warning, or some eerie terror, or the uneasy ghost of a dead man-who knows what may once have happened at that very spot? Perhaps mischievous apparitions of the fog seek to entice him from the right path into the desert where horror dwells, where wanton witches dance their rounds which no man ever leaves alive. Who can protect him, guide him aright, give him good counsel? The spirit of Night itself, the genius of its kindliness, its enchantment, its resourcefulness, and its profound wisdom. She is indeed the mother of all mystery. The weary she wraps in slumber, delivers from care, and she causes dreams to play about their souls. Her protection is enjoyed by the unhappy and persecuted as well as by the cunning, whom her ambivalent shadows offer a thousand devices and contrivances. With her veil she also shields lovers, and her darkness keeps ward over all caresses, all charms hidden and revealed. Music is the true language of her mystery-the enchanting voice which sounds for eyes that are closed and in which heaven and earth, the near and the far, man and nature, present and past, appear to make themselves understood.

But the darkness of night which so sweetly invites to slumber also bestows new vigilance and illumination upon the spirit. It makes it more perceptive, more acute, more enterprising. Knowledge flares up, or descends like a shooting star-rare, precious, even magical knowledge. And so night, which can terrify the solitary man and lead him astray, can also be his friend, his helper, his counsellor. 

Danger and protection, terror and reassurance, certainty and straying-all of these night conceals within herself. Her domain is the rare and unexpected, the sudden presentiment, unfettered by place and time. She guides and prospers the recipient of her favor, and enables him, without his expecting it, to come upon some great windfall. To all who require her protection she is evenhanded; she ofers herself to all, and permits all to savor her benevolence. Such too is the world of Hermes. Like every world it has its lofty and its humble sphere. Both depend on good opportunity, the favor of the moment, the luck of the road; in both, mobility, ingenuity, briskness are the highest virtues, and the goal is the treasure that suddenly bursts into light. Broad indeed was the view that surveyed this world, lively indeed the eye that perceived its configuration to be that of a god and was able to recognize the profundity of the divine even in roguery and irresponsibility. It is in the full sense a world, that is to say, a whole world, not a fraction of the total sum of existence, which Hermes inspirits and rules. all things belong to it, but they appear in a different light than in the realms of the other gods. Whatever happens comes as on wings from heaven, and entails no obligation; whatever is done is a master stroke, and its enjoyment involves no responsibility. A man who chooses this world of gain and the favor of its god Hermes must accept loss also, for there cannot be the one without the other.

But Hermes protects highwaymen and thieves, and even though he conducts pious wayfarers safely past them, it is the thieves who seem particularly close to his nature and heart. This signifies a huge expansion of the divine sphere of operation. Its compass is no longer delimited by human wishes but rather by the totality of existence. Hence it comes about that this compass contains good and evil, the desirable and the disappointing, the lofty and the base. This Hermes is not a power who provides assistance in specific needs of life; he is the spirit of a constellation which recurs in most diverse conditions and which embraces loss sa wel sa gain, mischief as well as kindliness. Though much of this must seem questionable from a moral point of view, nevertheless it is a configuration which belongs to the fundamental aspects of living reality, and hence, according to Greek feeling, demands reverence, if not for all its individual expressions, at least for the totality of its meaning and being.

## The Nature of the Gods: Spirit and Form

A procession of brilliant figures has passed before us, and we stand and reflect. Who are they, these powers that carry the wealth of the world in their hands? Each severally has presented himself to us in his particular mode: but what is the essence that is common to them all and makes gods of them? It is easy to pronounce the word "god," but what can its meaning be here, among Homer's Greeks?

Common to all of them is immortality, and they are called the eternal ones who exist forever. But this must surely not be hardened into the dogma that they were never born; in view of the immeasurableness of their life such a detail is insignificant. Nevertheless they could never be imagined save in the most radiant bloom of youth. For the Hellenic idea of god this is very significant and serves as a symbol of their peculiar essence. Other peoples have felt no compunction in thinking of their deity as old, indeed as very ancient; no image could more forcefully suggest the venerable wisdom they possessed. But for the Greek his inmost feelings resisted such a notion. For him old age was a condition of the weariness, impoverishment, and darkening of nature, that vital and holy nature from which he could never at all separate the spirit. Even the highest wisdom must belong not to a region beyond life but to life's most buoyant energy, and knowledge must dwell not on the hoary countenance turned away from the world but on the bright and youthful brow and the blooming lips of Apollo.

Beauty as well as the freshness of youth belongs to the image of the gods. And beauty could not be perfect, in the Greek view, without tall stature. Beautiful indeed were the Nymphs with whom Artemis played, "but she herself stood a ful head taller than the others." When Demeter made herself known to dwellers on earth she suddenly stood before their terrified eyes in radiant beauty and stature." But a reverent awe of nature forbade imagination to enlarge tallness of stature into hugeness. Not as giant or monster but in the handsomest proportions of bodily form with which nature produced its supreme works must deity manifest itself. Eternal youth, beauty, and in addition power and knowledge, which often seemed limitless-possession of these qualities made the gods' existence blessed. They are expressly caled "the blesed." Their dwelling is in eternal radiance on high, never visited by winds, rain, or snow; there they live in daily pleasure, high above men, whose need and suffering can never reach their height.

We ourselves are accustomed to think of the divine being as preoccupied with man and his needs and are little concerned with his existence beyond humanity. But here the spiritual eye seeks a higher world which is no longer troubled for man's sake; and it stands enthralled before the vision of its perfection...To be sure, partisanship for men and peoples sometimes leads to a vigorous argument, but dissension never endures for long, and no day ends without bringing the gods together in festive pleasure for the common enjoyment of their divine existerice. 

The relationship between man and gods, then, is that they are akin to one another, and yet separated by an abyss. Pindar expresses it plainly:

- There is one race of men, one race of gods; both have breath of life from a single mother. But sundered power holds us divided, so it is that the one is nothing, while for the other the brazen sky is estaqblished their sure citadel forever. 

There can be no doubt that with the victory of Zeus there ascended to the throne of heaven a nobler race of gods, one destined for world-rule in a higher sense. The magnificent opening of Pindar's First Pythian Ode praises the blessed harmony of the new world of gods, which hearkens with rapture to notes of Apollo's lyre and the Muses' choir, while Zeus's opponents, the savage enemies of the gods upon earth, in the sea, and in fearful Hades, hear the heavenly song with detestation.

But no intelligent person would suggest that the great Greek epics addressed only the aesthetic sensibilities of their listeners. They showed them compelling pictures of all the perfections he aspired to, and glorified no other gods than those to which the compulsion of all his energies attracted him. We must not judge so youthful and vigorous a civilization by the gauge of our own divided state. In our Christian Europe religion walks alongside material and intellectual life, but they continue alien to each other, even where they touch. Youthful and unbroken civilizations, on the other hand, know of no religion that is not inextricably interwoven with the totality of human existence. Here all experience, thought, achievement, find their endlessness and glory in the idea of god. It is a worthy task indeed to investigate this idea of god among a people like the Greek, and finaly to pose for Greece too the question which Asiatic religions have long made familiar to us: Through what new revelation of the divine did Zeus, Athena, and Apollo become the objects of hte highest vision and the loftiest devotion?

Among the relegated divinities there are brilliant names, deities who were once powerful, even dominant. Some loom so large in mythic narratives that we might be tempted to judge their esteem in religion accordingly; but we must not be deceived: the numerous specific indications of a living faith yield a quite different picture. The realm of the ancient gods is always tangential to the religion of the dead; in it, indeed, life is a sibling of death. Nothing is more characteristic of the spirit of the ancient realm, and nothing separates it from the new gods more obviously. The dark house of Hades where the dead dwell is "an abomination to the gods." According to the belief of the classical period, Apollo could not come into contact with the dead. The goddess Artemis cannot tarry near her favorite Hippolytus because death is near: "Farewell! For me it is not lawful to look on death or to pollute my eyes with the gasps of the dying. I see that you are now near that sad case. In Homer, at all events, the gods do not scruple to touch acorpse. But the realm of death is alien and repulsive to them, and their devotees have no religious worship to spare for it. The cult of the dead is incompatible with worship of the Olympians. Indeed, belief in the Olympians involved the conviction that the dead had no importance whatever for the world of the living, and that persons whose power had been so deeply felt were now to be considered only as strengthless shadows removed to a distance beyond reach. It has been argued that the new spirit was devoted to light and life with such ardor that, as if blinded, it could no longer see death. And when we reflect that the dead no longer have any ties with this world and hence no longer receive honors, and that even in their own world they are only phantoms, we may easily fall into the opinion that the world of the dead and its gods had no serious meaning whatever in the Homeric outlook. 

But in the Homeric age the primal thought that the dead were impotent and dreamy shadows became central to the entire belief in the dead. all that remains of the deceased is actually no more than a delicate breath in human form without either will or power to act. An infinite chasm separates him from the world where consciousness, will, and act rule, and holds his twilight existence fast in yonder ancient realm of night forever. This is a stark denial of the naïve belief and its favorite fancies. And yet it comprises no mere denial. If the departed may not at least continue the active life, which they once led on earth, in the seclu- sion of the beyond, as other peoples and the later Greeks themselves believed, what reason is there not to declare them null and void? If we folow Homer's thoughts carefully we suddenly realize that he has given a highly ingenious turn to the primitive conception of the impotence of the dead. The shade of the dead in Hades below, which can no longer function and does not even possess consciousness, which wanders through the eternal night aimless and inactive, is the form of what belongs to the "has-been." It is no cipher and has substantial existence, but its reality is of a special sort. In it everything is past, everything is static and turned backwards, without present and without future. So for the first time in the world the has-been, the past, has here become an idea. The persistence of the dead is no longer an imitation of life; the essentials of life they have lost once and for al. And yet there they stand, solemnly and turned.

(Note-to-self: Death = Hades = Plato Forms = Dead... Anaximander... Ghost in the shell) 

It is very significant that Homer's thought was reborn after a millennium in the spirit of Goethe, when he sang of Faust going to the Mothers: 

- Flee from created things Into the realms of forms no lives attend! Delight in what have long since not been there...

All of this holy and mysterious throng which came so near to older generations out of the caverns of night must now shyly recede into the shadows. It was outshone by the brilliance of the new gods-but not condemned and banished, as other peoples treated their ancient divinities when the new had triumphed. This is most eloquent evidence for the character of the new belief; its noble wisdom is remote from jealousy and assertiveness. Its radiant deity possesses sufficient greatness to recognize the dark presence which is not its peer. Thus the ancient and primeval ones remain venerable in the depths, but the crown of true divinity must be yielded to a higher realm. Thus all the figures who, according to Homeric belief, do not possess the crown of complete divinity have this in common: they are constrained by matter and in their persons represent the sanctity of specific elements.

In the heavenly group of the Homeric religion, on the other hand, the female sex recedes in a manner which cannot be accidental. There the gods who are dominant are not only of the masculine sex, but most decidedly represent the masculine spirit. Though Athena is associated with Zeus and Apollo in the supreme triad, she expressly denies her feminine aspect and makes herself a genius of masculinity.

This reconciliation and recognition is symbolic of the rule of the new spirit and throws a bright light upon its character. If the feminine powers of earth had prevailed they would have sought no compromise. Ineluctably any who disagreed would have succumbed to their blind hatred, for their greatness and fearfulnes lay in their undeviating rigidity.

The new and heavenly gods, on the other hand, are free enough not to eradicate the old. They acknowledge its truth, and thereby manifest their higher knowledge. It is not their desire, as it is of new gods of other peoples, that all other worship should henceforth be regarded as godlessness, and that everything other than themselves must be forgotten forever. As spirits of the sublime they leave to the darkness of earth the dignity appropriate to it; but it must remain within its limits, for above it there has opened a realm of light to which the loftiest love of the human spirit must henceforward belong. The gods who now rule life sa guides and as ideals no longer belong to earth but to ether; and hence of the three realms and their gods with whose distribution we began this section, only one remains as the place of divine perfection, and that is Zeus's realm of light. And yet the dwellers of heaven are not citizens of a beyond, wholly severed from this earthly world. The forms of their existence are the same as on earth-they even have human shape - but for them everything is transfigured and perfect where for us it is imperfect and fleeting. Neither are their effects upon life supernatural, nor do they exert absolute power to force recognition of their law. Their being and doing operate wholly along the paths of nature. The question then arises of their attitude to the realm of matter and nature; they are wholy at one with this realm, and yet their home is high above it, and they belong to two worlds, that of the sublime ether and that of the heavy clod.

A masculine mind striving towards clarity is fated to have a more overwhelming experience of the night of the eternal abyss than a dreamy feminine disposition fascinated by anything mysterious. This disposes of any doubt that the Homeric conception of the gods belongs to the realm of spirit. It is the spirit that gave the primeval belief in the dead its new and ever memorable form; it is the spirit that rejected the enthusiasm of Dionysiac religion. This significant word has often been used thoughtlessly or capriciously. It serves as a favorite designation for the boundless and incorporeal, for what is beyond all form or description. But where spirit is, there clarity and form hold sway. Its element is so far from being supernatural and supersensory that an indissoluble bond connects it with nature. Nature and spirit live in and for one another. The first great manifestation of spirit is the Homeric religion, which is simultaneously the first great manifestation of nature. In later Greece the spirit continued to emerge in manifold aspects, but never in so original a form as in this religion of the living spirit. With it Hellenism uttered its eternal word concerning the world. The spirituality of the new gods is bound up with the closest fidelity to nature; and it is this fidelity that first enables us to understand their spirituality completely. How it can draw the most profound spirit to nature at its quickest, is best expressed by Hölderlin in his lines on Socrates and Alcibiades:

- Holy Socrates, why, knowing much greater things, Do you honor this youth, offer him himage still? Why so lovingly, raptly As on gods, do you gaze on him? Who most deeply has thought loves what is most alive, Who has looked at the world balues high virtue most; Often finally wise men To the beautiful bow their heads. 

These verses may well stand as a motto for what follows. 

Primeval worship of the elements and natural phenomena is plainly perceptible in Homer, and was never wholy lost to Hellenism generally. A peculiarly broad and large devotion speaks to us when we hear night, day, and evening caled "holy" or "divine" in the Homeric poems, or when sea and streams, countries and cities, grain, olives, and wine, even noble humanity are crowned with divine glory by such words. This profound majesty of the world was not denied by the new gods. Else they would have been forced into stark opposition to the old geniuses, and what would then become of the wholeness and harmony of the Homeric world? The sanctity of nature was assumed in the essence of the bright divinities and now appears in them as enlarged meaning and spiritual grandeur. What this means we can learn from each of the great divine personages. They are loosed from the earthy and yet present in all of its forms. How they are loosed and how present merits reflection.

The new deity does not act as a power that sets the world in motion from without; its place is rather within the world itself. Yet it is not a single, specific thing. The sanctity of fire might well merit worship as the genius of a specific element, but it can never merit the rank of the divine in the larger sense. Even the majesty of the sea could not reach up to this sphere. Always divinity is a totality, a whole world in its perfection. This applies also to the supreme gods, Zeus, Athena, and Apollo, the bearers of the highest ideals. None of them represents a single virtue, none is to be encountered in only one direction of teeming life; each desires to fil, shape, and illumine the whole compass of human existence with his peculiar spirit. For mankind as such, divinity never denotes a single duty or aspiration but always the totality of life; and in the world at large, which embraces all elements and forms of life, including man, it manifests itself even more completely and diversely. To be sure, it is never an all-pervading world-soul, a mysterious ground for the life of all earthly beings, but always a defined entity; yet its special character is always the signature of a world complete in itself.

This is to be seen at its most beautiful precisely where we should expect a strictly circumscribed and one-sided sphere of action. Aphrodite arouses the desires of love and vouchsafes their fulfillment. Considered from this aspect alone she appears to be a genius of asingle natural force. But she is infinitely more; she shapes a whole world and inspires it with her spirit. From her comes not so much the ecstasy of desire as the charm which kindles and propels it. She is the enchantment that radiates from things and beings and enraptures the senses with its smile. Not only men and beasts but plants, inanimate images and appearances, even thoughts and words, derive their winning, moving, overwhelming sweetness from her. And so her enchantment brings into being a world where loveliness moves toward delight, and all that is separated desires blissful fusion into oneness. In it all possibilities and desires are included, from dark animal impulse to yearning for the stars. We find the same thing in all the great deities of the new order. They constitute and manifest a creation which is always complete in itself. Whenever the world displays one of its large aspects, it is their spirit that shines out of it. Thus Artemis too is the meaning and spirit of a reality which encompasses man, beast, and nature and which has received the eternal form of its essence from the goddess. And so in the case of each deity we find anew that it is most intimately bound up with the things of this earth, and yet it never denotes one single facet but is an eternal form of existence in the whole compass of creation.

Suddenly the deities stood over the realms of life, living manifestations of the eternal meaning which pervades each of them and which is as present in the splendor of the sublime as in the earthy breath of valleys and hills, in the burgeoning of plants and in the beating pulse of animal life. These powers are not of such sort that belief in them could have gradually expanded from modest conceptions of individual functions and then become spiritualized in the degree that thought advanced and standards rose. The new entity and the multiplicity brilliantly radiating from a central point were present at a single stroke, as the form of a realm of existence which in them had unlocked its eternal content. So the primeval sanctity of nature reappeared, transfigured in a higher reality. In the birth hour of its true religion the Greek spirit bestowed upon this higher reality its first and greatest reverence. The Greek saw and knew: everything individual is imperfect and transitory, but the form abides. In it reposes the meaning of all being and happening. It is the true reality, it is the divine. Everywhere present, it is one with all phenomena of the sphere of life which it rules. But sa highest essence and permanent being it stands by itself and high above the earthly in the splendor of the ether.

Modern man tends to confuse the general validity of such conceptions with abstract modes of thought. Even at this date the student of religion is seldom capable of perceiving behind the divine personages of ancient faith anything beyond either natural objects and physical forces or disembodied general concepts. But these interpretations wavering between coarse sensuality and rationalism will always be put to shame by the plastic vitality of the Greek gods. They give proof of a higher insight, in which seeing and understanding are one and the same thing. This insight always discovers totalities, and in them seizes upon precisely those traits for which the intellect has no gauge-loftiness and majesty, solemnity, magnificence, kindliness, aloofness, strangeness, craftiness, grace, fascination, and many other significant and at the same time obvious values which rational thought must pass over. This insight does not even need to name what it perceives, for it conceives the forms in shapes constantly born anew of the spark carried from spirit to spirit. Its proper language is the plastic creativity of poet and artist; but this should not prevent us from recognizing its eminently religious significance. For what would be religious if not man's emotion when he glances into the depths of being? And here the depths speak to the illumined spirit. A moment may suffice for the blazing forth of figures worthy of veneration to whom no temple has ever been built. So in his fifth Isthmian Ode Pindar prays to a being who appears there and nowhere else, though he gives her the name of Theia, mother of Helios," this being is the mighty enchantment which glows in gold, the magnificence which shines over racing craft in the sea and horses in the race course, the glory on the garlanded head of the victor in the games - it is the brilliance, the actual radiance, "the divine One" (Theia), of whose splendor the sun bears witness and also the soul of man when it flares up in the blissfulness of the perfect moment. The birth hour of the specifically Greek conception of the gods was the great moment when through its essence the deity revealed the meaning inherent in a special sphere of existence, and bestowed upon it permanence, unity, and nobility.

It is worthy of the most ingenious and creative of humankind that in the period of their greatest religious inspiration they resolved to recognize and worship the divine not in absolute power, wisdom, or will, but in the primal forms of reality; thus their religion exhibits the same evidence for the unity of nature and spirit as does their plastic art. By itself the human form is no novelty, for it had doubtless long been familiar in the early period along with the animal form. But now it had become sole and exclusive, and this marks the decisive break of the new belief from the old. Manifestation in animal form is proof of an unspiritual divinity bound to the elemental and material, and of the tremendous and overwhelming emotions which were aroused by confrontation with it. Human form, on the other hand, proclaims a divine nature whose perfection is spiritual. This spirituality makes the new view an apparent approximation to our own, but its sanctification of the natural form puts it at the farthest possible remove from our vision. The clear definiteness of the natural form was accepted as a genuine manifestation of the divine, and hence deity itself must be presented in the noblest of all natural forms - the human.

To the approach of these thinkers the spirit to which the divine human form was manifested stands diametrically opposed. In joyous clarity, so palpable to the senses, they can see only superficiality and frivolity. But the free and spacious Greek conception of the divine, whose witnesses have been not prophets and hermits but great creative artists-and not in antiquity alone-cannot be lost to mankind. For fi all the forms and phenomena of this world point to the godhead, then the most excellent of them must be its image. Godhead here implies the full significance of a whole realm of existence, the clothing of each of its forms with splendor and nobility, and the manifestation at nature's highest point of its greatest glory and true visage. In that the god himself bears human traits, he exhibits in its most spiritual aspect the realm all of whose forms, from the inanimate to the animal and the human, are reflected in him. Thus his image consistently remains in the line of nature, but it stands at the highest point of that line. Deity is the configuration that recurs in all forms, the meaning that holds them all together; and it reveals its spirituality in the human form, which is the most sublime. 

## Being and Happening: The Manifestations of the Gods

With the idea of the being ofthe gods, that of the mode and manner of their effects upon human life is closely related. This too was never formulated dogmatically, but it is clearly perceptible in all the accounts of gods who manifested themselves through men. It is the basic idea which Greek religion could never lose. Since the period of the Enlightenment certain of its manifestations may have appeared strange and objectionable, but its central meaning could never be affected by criticism. Even today its truth is confirmed; for, innocent of conceptualism, it honors only the lively awareness of the presence of the divine in this world, without being oblivious to human freedom or to the regularity and calculability of events. Imbued with this idea, the Greek faith is the most magnificent example of a wholy undog- matic religion, which contradicts no human experience and yet penetrates and encompasses all existence. 

It is only when belief begins to waver that the intellect can assert its demands; this wavering is a phenomenon which can never be explained, but only be indicated, by the image of a receding of the divine presence. But Homer's world is still completely under the spell of the divine presence. The importance that divine activity had for this world, which was anything but mean-spirited and small-minded, is wholly without parallel. Every state, every capacity, every mood, every thought, every act and experience was mirrored in the deity. Whatever the poet may be describing, it cannot seem important to him without his uttering the name of a god or the divine in general. This constant remembrance of the divine, this permanent sensitivity to heavenly presence, must leave a deep impression even upon one to whom Homeric religion is alien. Even though in numerous instances reference to the gods had become a mere formula, it nevertheless proves an alert emotion; and it remains true that there is no other conception of the world in which earthly and human existence is so filled with the presence of the divine, no society (unless it be a religious body) which took thought of the divine with such loyalty and reverence every moment of its existence.

The deeper our understanding penetrates, the more despondent must our criticism become. So it goes with all complex configurations which are born of the fullness of experience and carry their justification only in themselves. For in religion we seek another and mysterious world, whereas it is basic to the character of the Greek that it associates reverent recognition with acute observation of reality. Its divine is neither a justifying explanation of the natural course of the world nor an interruption and abolition of it: it is itself the natural course of the world.

The gods whose spirit is perceptible in every happening operate partly individually and independently of one another and partly in combination as a unity. Both modes are of equally great significance. Their willfulness, indeed, sometimes causes division in earthly affairs; but this only reflects the multiplicity and contradiction of existence, which to the active man must seem the more unappeasable the livelier and richer his experience is. 

We shall yet encounter this greatness of Zeus, which waxes towards the infinite and issues in the inconceivable; here we must take thought of another and no less significant general conception of the divine, in which the divine, as a majestic essence, is wholy and unexceptionably contrasted to man. In many cases Homer (and of course later Hellenism) attributes the instigation of important events to "gods" in general (theoi) or to "god" (theos). The latter expression does not at all imply a definite personality, in the monotheistic sense, but rather bears the same meaning as the first-the unity of the divine world as it communicates itself, despite its diverse manifestations, to living sensibilities. The unity of the heavenly power becomes quite obvious when, as often in the Odyssey, "the gods" operate as a power of fate and their operation is expressed by a word that properly denotes the spinning of the thread of destiny (epiklotho). Individual gods retain their particularity and the tensions between them persist. They are the world, and the world is manifold. And yet man knows of the onenes of the divine. He knows of it, but he can no longer grasp it by way of representation. It is no longer form. But for the very reason that it is beyond representation moral ideas could be attached to it.

Where and how do the gods impinge upon earthly existence? This question always implies another: What can or does man effect out of himself? Every idea of the function of deity is, insofar as it concerns man, the obverse of a specific psychology, and a people's thoughts about its gods cannot be understood without understanding what it thought about man. It is not as fi human self-knowledge came first and knowledge of deity followed. No view could be more perverse. But it is also wrong to place consciousness of deity first, ahead of self-consciousness. Neither is without the other. In devout experience both are present simultaneously and are one and the same.

The Greek also senses that what he chooses and does in full consciousness is something given to him, and his awareness touches on the divine even where we think of nothing more than the familiar regularity of events or of our own shrewdness and ability. And yet man is no mere tool of the gods, his existence is not merely a field for their sport. He himself is something, and his own action is demanded of him. Man's active mobility meets with the wonder of the enchanted world, which enchants him also. The fullness of the world and the fullness of man are present simultaneously. No answer can be given to the question where the human ceases and the divine begins, because belief is rooted in the experience that one is encompassed by the other and both coincide. The Greek image of divine-human operation contrasts remarkably with the view familiar to ourselves. The Greek deity does not operate from the beyond upon the inwardness of man, upon his soul, which is connected with it in some mysterious way. The deity is one with the world and approaches man out of the things of the world if he is upon the way and participates in the world's manifold life. It is not through turning inward that man experiences deity but by proceeding outward, seizing, acting. To the man who is active and enterprising the deity presents itself with immediacy, whether it facilitates or hinders, enlightens or confuses. Deity looks upon the kindled lover out of the eyes of beauty with their searing glow, and the missteps into which he is swept are as much the deity's work as his. 

There is no suggestion that man need not bear the consequences of his bad actions. On the contrary; they overtake him with a ruthlessness which terrifies us. Tragedy, which drew its subject matter from ancient epic, is full of these awful consequences. That is just what tragedy means: there is no escape, and good intentions do not come into question. What has happened must work its course out. No repentance, no humbling oneself before god, can obviate its course. But in return, remorse has lost its poisoned barb. Whether the deed was good or evil, whether man may praise or blame himself for it, in no case can he believe that he brought it about himself, that he himself embodies a sovereign will whose goodness or evil is alone responsible for his acts and his derelictions. Whatever has happened, even if it must destroy him ultimately, belongs, like all else in the world, to a higher providence; even the passion which was its source has its wonderful and eternal visage among the gods, and to this he may look up even when he is crushed. As long as these views retained their full seriousness, that is, as long as they were associated with a firm belief in the divine nature of the world, they could not endanger morality. In that early age man could see the world and his own existence in the mirror of genuine myth. Only when thought, which had become self-determining, protested that impulses other than moral and beneficial must not issue from higher powers; only when the questing eye turned to man's inwardness in its search for the cause of wrong-doing, could Helen be rebuked as Hecuba rebuked her: "Your own heart transformed itself into Cypris at sight of my son."

Condemnation of the human heart is much older than Euripides' tragedy. It belongs to theosophie mysticism, which set a different myth in place of the large and genuine one. We do not know for certain where it arose. In the post-Homeric centuries its importance was considerable. But we must not forget that it is wholly alien to the spirit expressed in the lofty creations of the Greeks. Its doctrine was that human nature is fundamentally corrupt. This sad condition pointed backward to a primeval curse on the whole race. There was a divine world to which man belonged in some mysterious fashion and out of which he had sunk into this night of error and evil. But the divine realm desired to help him return, and revealed a holy path to him for his ascent. As long as the original whole subsisted, man himself had no need to fathom his own inwardness because he found outside himself the great myth, embracing one and all, in which he too was subsumed. 

In the midst of this world filled with divine figures stands man, not as an alien but directed to it with all his faculties, attached to it, receiving and expecting from it knowledge and decision, success and failure, pleasure and pain. To be sure, he is as fully aware of the capacities of his spirit and temper as he is of those of his body. He knows that he possesses inwardly something we call soul; he calls it thymos. This inward man he distinguishes plainly from the outward. In moments of need he even speaks to it, as a man speaks to his brother or comrade. But this inwardness itself has no language; it becomes aroused, but it never addresses a man. It has no world of its own, it somehow lacks the dimension of depth. Its world is the great realm of life without. Hence there is no myth of the soul, and there can be none, for the soul faces only outward, as it were, towards the world of forms, not inward, towards an invisible realm accessible only to itself. It is difficult for one who belongs to a later civilization to free himself of the prejudice that this condition must derive from want of depth and insight. He calls it primitive or childish, and regards the conceptions that emerged in later ages as the result of development and improvement. But the want lies not in the earlier mode of thought but in our own understanding. Nothing is lacking in that ancient conception of existence; it is round and complete in itself. 

If in the old conception of existence inward man had no myth to himself, this means that he was entirely integrated, in a single and complete configuration, with the warp and woof of the myth of the world. His experiences are no property of his soul, anchored in deep solitude or in a formless beyond kindred to the soul, but a portion of the world which has its place and its meaning in the great myth of the world. Hence there is no lack of depth, sa we may like to think. For here the sensitivity with which we scrutinize the soul's depths is directed to the world and its configurations, and in its image is able to recognize aspects of experience so faithfully that even we, who are accustomed to a quite different mode of thought, are swept away by the truth of the vision. And here we notice with astonishment that it was once possible to explain from the world about us, apprehended with largeness and depth, what we seek to understand by steeping ourselves in our inwardness; and we notice with admiration that nothing of its content is lost in the process but that it is rather enhanced to magnificence - whereas we with our knowledge of psychology are always in danger of losing ourselves in the petty and the trivial.

That age had no doubt that man, when he was not subject to external coercion, was determined by inclinations and convictions. But these impulses do not point inward to some emotional center or basic will, but outward towards the largeness of the world. What we in a moment of decision experience as motivations are here, for the enlightened, the gods. With them, and not in the human heart, resides the depth and the fundament of everything significant that transpires in man. This means that he knows he is surrounded by a great being and its living forms. Who these forms are is the most important question. If he knows them he knows himself; for contact with them is that decisive event, which he experiences now in one direction, now in another. Far from limiting himself to the subjective, therefore, and persisting in this groove, becoming at once insecure and obstinate, he expands towards the objective and substantial, towards the being of the world and hence towards the divine. This applies equally to fortune and misfortune, to good and evil. Even when an objectionable and fateful sphere attracts him, it is the realm and form of agod, and fi its fascination has seduced him from orderliness and duty he may, in his sorrow for what has happened, refer to its power of compulsion and think of its greatness. However bitterly he may lament his action, his conscience need not torment him, for the decision was no defeat of submerged good intentions in a struggle with evil inclination.

It has often been a matter of wonder that the Greek is inclined to seek motivation for moral decisions not in will but in cognition. One who understands the objectivity of the ancient Greek view of the world, one who is capable of following its orientation outward instead of inward, towards the myth of the world instead of the myth of the soul, can only find consistency in the emphasis upon cognition rather than upon will or emotion. In the world of objective forms justice and honor, prudence and moderation, tenderness and charm, are not in the first instance subjective modes and personal attitudes but realities, permanent forms of being which at any significant moment may confront man with divine substantiveness. To the Greek, therefore, it is not so essential that this or that is felt as it is that it is known and understood. The man who behaves benevolently, nobly, or justly "has knowledge of" the benevolent, the noble, and the just. For him they are things of which he possesses cognition, whereas others do not. In the Greek language, on the other hand, even in Homer, this conception is paramount. Here moral attitudes are based less upon notions of sensibility or inclinations than on those of knowledge and understanding. Where we say of a man that he "thinks" fairly, Homer has "he knows fairness." The same mode of expression is applied to everything which we are accustomed to include under the notion of disposition. A man of friendly disposition is one who "knows friendliness." In expression, therefore, it makes no difference whether a man possesses a desirable disposition or whether he "knows" good counsel.

It need hardly be said that this does not mean knowledge derived from conceptual reasoning. There must be another mode, that "other kind of cognition" which according to Aristotle is inextricably bound up with virtue? A comprehension which is not rational and yet sharply differentiated from emotion and desire, and which belongs to the realm of enlightenment, insight, knowledge. The fact that Hellenism bestowed its most distinguished attention upon this aspect of the moral problem definitely indicates that it was not preoccupied with the rational: here we have beautiful testimony to the objectivity of its perception and thought. It does not even possess a specific word for the will; the expression which properly denotes insight (gnome) is here applied equally to resolution.

It was this "knowledge" which was darkened or altogether absent when a man let himself be carried away into an improper or fateful course. The Homeric Greek does not think of evil or sinful inclinations. To him the impulse to pleasure and power is neither good nor evil but natural. Even the noblest possess it, and it may grow into a passion that threatens to overrun everything. But he has a higher knowledge of noble and meaningful forms of the world process, a cognition that belongs not to calculating understanding but to the perceiving spirit, a consciousness of stately and eternal realities-or gods!-which as soon as it is distinctly grasped converts into will and sets limits to the desires of the heart. 

The mode of thought here characterized as having an outward orientation is none other than the mythic. Both man and his world of experience take on objective form. Primal forms are imaged forth in his joys and sorrows, his appetites and insights. But the will, good and evil, remains insubstantial. The divine is the pure form of the world, its explanation, its myth. Here the thought cannot conceivably turn away from the world, towards the divine. The existence of the world is not submerged in the deity. Man, in whom the deity manifests itself, is no mere point of transition to a higher world. It is not as if some other spoke and acted through him, visited him with an emotion, will and knowledge which are not his own. This would have destroyed the mystery of the contact of the divine and human. We recognize the wonderfully lucid spirit of the Greek in his myth, the myth of specifically this world and specifically this man. Its images of events which give proof of gods and their deeds carry irresistible conviction even for us, and their truthfulness abides whether or not we believe in these gods and their power. In other religions reference to the deity all to often denotes a falsification of experience; here we see the marvel of full agreement between knowledge and faith. The truest image of actuality is at the same time the liveliest testimony for the existence of the gods.

Odysseus was sad and anxious when he looked upon the host of the Greeks rushing wildly to their ships. Only to test them Agamemnon had counselled them to give up their senseless enterprise and to return to their dear homes. To characterize Odysseus the poet uses an expression which sets his shrewdness and resourcefulness beside Zeus's. But now these qualities seem to have left him in the lurch-nay, at this very moment they were to assert themselves brilliantly. And this comes about when the man whose cleverness has been compared to Zeus's finds at his side the clever daughter of Zeus, whom that "lord of counsel" (metieta) had borne out of his head and who of all the gods is "most excellent in acuteness and shrewdness." She makes him realize the disgrace of cowardly retreat-but it was just this that had made his heart heavy; and she enjoins him to go among the men instantly and without hesitation, to address them one by one and with winning speech to restrain them from their purpose. He does so, as we are told in the lines following, with great skill and success. Thus we have confirmation of Odysseus' proverbial cleverness, whose boast was that it supplied the right thought for every difficult moment. But what might be described as invention is in truth the inspiration of the clever man by his heavenly escort, the goddess with the sharp and clear eyes. He hears her voice and immediately turns to action. Of her approach and departure we hear nothing.

Similar, and in part in the same words, is the story of Athena addressing the raging Achiles with the voice of reason, but here the illumination is enhanced to the proportions of a vision. The provoked lion feels himself touched from behind, turns about, and sees the flaming light of the divine eyes. Immediately he recognizes Athena and shows her his heart burning for vengeance. But she counsels wiser and worthier self-mastery. And the mighty hero heeds. all this is the matter of a moment. No one else could see the goddess, no one noticed the conversation. Before she began, Achilles loosened the sword from its sheath; when she finished, he thrust it back again and she was gone. She had made him choose the sensible course. But this time too she came at a moment of indecision, and one of his alternatives was just what the divine word urged and made convincing. So her intervention tipped the scale of sensibility and thought. 

Actually, as we see here, there can be no alternative between the independent action of a human and the influence or injunction of a deity. What a man wills and does is himself and is the deity. Both are true, and in the last analysis the same. The thought that even what proceeds out of a man "himself" has its origin with the gods is very beautifully expressed by the bard in the Odyssey: "No teacher have I had; it is god who implanted the riches of song in my heart."

Ajax says that it is time to go, for "Achilles is savage and remorseless; he is cruel and cares nothing for the love of his comrades." But then turning to Achilles himself he says: "The gods have put awicked unforgiving spirit in your heart, and this all about a girl." The second statement of the situation is merely more solemn and serious than the first, but in no way contradicts it; Achilles' hardness of heart is no less effected by deity fi he hardens it himself. It is evident that this conception, closely as it binds man to deity, does not signify that he actually lacks freedom. The impression of constraint is all the more ruled out as man's action is predominantly related to the state of his insight. No external will or desire took possession of him when he chose the worse course, nor was it that his nobler feeling proved powerless in the face of his cruder inclinations. It is only that his clear perception of the beautiful, the just, and the reasonable-three great realities- was confounded. 

The Homeric conception does not construe human resolution as constraint. It remains the thing that a man experiences in himself and that one who understands the soul can describe. But even as such it derives from god. It is man himself who decides, and yet it is not he. In this sense, devout and at the same time large and free, Homer faces the eternal problem of free will and responsibility without casuistry or litigiousness. The man who goes wrong inust blame himself and must also bear the consequences of his acts. But he does not need to torment himself with remorse, for despite responsibility and requital his deed rests in the lap of the gods.

These fame-loving people ascribe te the gods not only the good fortune which they require but also the strength and prowess of which they are proud. The moment of exaltation when a wonderful quickness gives wings to every motion they call god-given; but god-given too is the capacity to act manfully and intelligently, as are also the emotions through which men can demonstrate their noble character. Thus it turns out that even what we regard as the expression of personal quality flows directly from the hands of the gods. It is only through action that this quality can, at each occasion, assert itself, and in the act, not in some fixed inward being, it has its reality for the ancient Greek view of the world. But every act depends on the world forces manifested in the event, eternal forms of which are the gods.

Man, whatever he is or can do, that is, whatever takes shape in him or proceeds from him, belongs to the great spectacle of being which has received its explanation in the divine myth. Marvellous as things may appear to our inward view, to our senses they are natural; and, in reverse, whatever we se and understand as natural is the divine. 

Such accounts can give us some notion of what the operation of the gods meant in this world-view. We are often tempted to substitute the word fortune-but in the deep and broad significance intended by Schiller in his poem of that name-in place of the names of the gods. "How merit and fortune are interrelated" - that is the theme which the many descriptions offer to our thought in ever new aspects. Upon the elect and enlightened the divine comes at one point of his path and with overwhelming certainty, and in special cases it raises him to a direct view of the deity.

Most enlightened of all is the poet. He sees events through and through even when the participants se only the surface. And often when the participants sense only that a divine hand is touching them the poet is able to name the god concerned and knows the secret of his purpose. This distinction between his own deeper understanding and the awareness of his hero is one of the neatest proofs of the living truth of his religion.

The meaningful combination of the natural and the miraculous, which leaves the rights of each unimpaired, has found classic expression in the famous stories of the gods who appear upon the earthly scene in human form. Apparently this comes about quite naturally. In a situation of whose gravity the participants may not be aware, suddenly some good friend or acquaintance intervenes and says or does something momentous. Only the poet knows that beneath the unremarkable exterior there is hidden a god who has assumed the form of the man. Upon those involved the intervention always produces a great effect. They become attentive to something and immediately realize its significance, and fi energetic action is required they are at once infused with a fiery spirit of fortitude and strength. Remarkable things happen when warriors clash, and the emotions of a passionately aroused temper are remarkable. Where is the line of demarcation between the natural and the miraculous? It is not actually the petition that brings divine help: its utterance is rather a sign that the deity itself is present. Contact with the deity is always followed immediately by the decisive deed. But fi we expect that here the miracle will be contrasted with natural ways we are greatly mistaken. Here too the miraculous grows out of the natural situation and shows the man experiencing it-who remains the sole witness-its eternal and divine visage. The introduction of a deity is never required to make an event intelligible in our sense. The stories could all be told without the slightest reference to deity, and they would undergo no substantial change. But the spirit of the Homeric world makes these references necessary, for it must link every decisive factor to the divine, however intelligible it may be to us on natural grounds. For this too, finally, we subjoin anumber of characteristic examples. In the Homeric understanding the miracle to be revered lies not in overcoming nature but in the infinite exaltation of the significant hour.

We can think the divine figures away without its course being altered. But then it would only be true to nature. By the introduction of the divine, however, the element of accident disappears. The details of the event and their totality are mirrored in the eternal, and yet none of the blood and breath of the living present is lost. Athena does in favor of Diomedes in the fifth book. She wishes to cover him with glory,180 and therefore fills him with strength and boldness. She makes his weapons shine like blazing fire, and throws him into the thickest fray. The first cast of his spear lays a noble Trojan low. Then like a winter torrent he rushes through the battlefield and routs the phalanxes of the Trojans. He is struck by the arrow of the archer Pandarus. Pandarus exults, in the belief that he has dealt Diomedes the mortal blow. But Diomedes asks Sthenelus to draw the arrow out of his shoulder and prays to Athena: "Hear me, daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus, Atrytone! If ever you loved my father well and stood by him in the thick of a fight, do the like now by me; grant me to come within a spear's throw of that man and kill him. He has been too quick for me and has wounded me; and now he is boasting that I shall not see the light of the sun much longer." And Athena hearkened to him. She made his limbs wonderfully supple.188 Moreover, she herself appears before him and tells him that she has placed his father's strong spirit in his heart; he must enter into battle without trepidation; he need not be fearful of gods in mortal shape, for she has drawn the veil from his eyes to know gods and men apart; he must avoid the immortals, with the exception of Aphrodite: if she should appear on the battle scene he must strike her with the edge of the bronze. Athena's words immediately become deed; she herself vanished when she uttered them, and Diomedes springs upon the enemy. If he had been eager enough for battle before, now he was three times fiercer, like a lion who had broken into a sheep yard. Wherever he turns, some Trojan is crushed under his stroke. Aeneas does not recognize him. He watches him with horror, and urges Pandarus to aim his bow at him; but straightway he fears it may be a god concealed in the form of a bloodthirsty mortal. 

If we read the story attentively we can only be astonished at the unerring ascription of exceptional experiences to the intense feeling of a single individual, here as elsewhere, whereas outside his range these experiences are resolved into purely natural and familiar processes. From the religious point of view it is significant that here man's mightiest achievements are explicitly regarded as deeds actually brought about by the agency of a god. The hero driving on irresistibly seems so huge to the enemy that he can regard him as a deity in human shape. But fi his spear wounds his opponent fatally, it is because Athena directed the weapon with true aim. And in the boldest venture of all we see the goddess herself standing at the warrior's side and herself driving the spear, which his hand thrusts, against the body of Ares, so that he is painfully wounded. The belief which prevails throughout the epic that every success be it only the blow that strikes home or the arrow that finds its mark-indicates the immediate intervention of divine powers, has here reached its highest expression. And we observe not only that these are moments of intense excitement, but also that they are in fact only moments, for their miraculous element vanishes at once or dissolves into the invisible. 

It is in the most astonishing images of divine manifestations, then, that we can most plainly see how alien to the spirit of true Greek piety is miracle in the commonly accepted sense, which other religions seek out and sanctify. That piety is the more significant in that the same spirit accomplishes all things, from the greatest to the least, through the gods, indeed conceives of them as being accomplished by the gods themselves; and it is so completely alive to this relationship that it never forgets to emphasize the role of the divine even when the prowess of the most admired heroes is to be celebrated. The deity that is here the object of faith is not an absolute master over nature who exhibits his sovereignty at its loftiest when he compels nature to act contrary to itself. It is the sanctity of the natural itself and one with its sway, present with its spirit in all that can be experienced and received with reverence by the pious soul. It is demonstrated as well in what is very simple and perfectly regular as in astonishing and awesome experiences of which only agreat heart is capable. In the epic, to be sure, where mighty men do and suffer, it is the extraordinary that is repeatedly brought before our eyes. But everywhere it presents itself in the same sense: not as the miracle of a god triumphing over nature, but rather as the experience of a great heart to whom -and to whom alone-at the height of his being and doing the deity presented itself out of the ordinary lines of nature.

In contrast to what must have been the views of the earlier period, they give expression to a revolution in thought whose importance cannot be rated too high and which must necessarily have been consummated before poetry of the Homeric sort could be possible. For the more astonishing the specific character of Homeric faith must appear to us upon close examination, the more noteworthy is the fact that it presents itself with no pathos and no criticism or justification, as something natural and self-evident. And fi any proof is still called for to show that what we have here are not merely the poet's fancies but Greek thoughts upon the world, the attitude of the Greek spirit in the post-Homeric age must carry conviction. For what is this attitude other than the acknowledgement of a nature which is not opposed to the divine and eternal but one with it? The extraordinary influence of Homeric epic upon Greek thought and creativity has often enough been stressed. It could not have become a guide to the future if it were not the expression of the true Greek spirit. Emerging victorious out of primeval visions, it here created its first and eternal monument.

## God and Man

Man, Genesis proudly asserts, was created in the image of God. The same notion is presented in the Greek account of the creation: "The earth, newly fashioned and but lately drawn away from lofty ether, still retained seeds of its kindred heaven; these Prometheus tempered with fresh running water and moulded after the image of the gods who govern all - finxit in effigiem moderantum cuncta deorum. The perfection which divinity possesses, that is to say, is reflected in humanity. What, in the miror of the Greek spirit, is the purest manifestation of humanity, its noblest transfiguration, in which the image of divinity is revealed? What ideal of humanity, large and momentous, confronts us in the reflected visage of the divine? The characteristics which are the fundamental and essential determinants can never be apprehended from direct statements. Verbal assertions concerning the character of a divinity, numerous though they may be, can almost never give us more than a distorted and exaggerated conception. Even in religions where doctrine is paramount we owe our profoundest conceptions to prophets endowed with plastic vision, who make our perception of deity vivid. The picture is most compelling when there is no intention to improve or reproach or comfort the world but only to testify to the greatest, most majestic, and most worshipful vision and faith of which the spirit is capable. Among the Greeks creative men of genius are not, as they are among other peoples, merely secondary and irresponsible witnesses of divine truth: in this natural and undogmatic religion it is precisely they who are the dedicated prophets.

The statues breathe a nobility and majesty which can only arouse reverence; they find a parallel only in ancient hymns or in the shattering or jubilant invocations of tragedy. If we are able to comprehend the meaning of this nobility and majesty, we shall have discovered how the ancient Greek spirit conceived the perfection of man and at the same time the image of the divine. The gods and their dominions, whose significance we have examined in some detail, testify to the thoroughly vital and open spirit with which the Greeks were able to recognize the divine in the manifold shapes of existence, serious or gay, powerful or amiable, manifest or enigmatic. Never is it the flight of man's dreams and aspirations, always and everywhere it is the power of reality, the breath and bouquet and glitter of the life which billowed about him, that steeped him in the purple brilliance of the divine. If he encountered his deities in the likeness of man, fi he discovered his own nobility and grandeur in their image, we cannot look for any attempt on his part to transcend nature or free himself from it; rather did he regard nature itself with such honest, unerring, and pure truth sa only a god could or might possess.

We may find delight in the bloom of the Greek phenomenon, but we save our respect for struggle, for titanic will and demand, for all that is absolute, that pushes forward into the limitless and the superhuman, for all that is incalculable and labyrinthine in humanity. Such a conception of life can naturally find but little nurture in the Greek figures. It is indeed shut of from the large configurations which had so much to say to the ancient Greek spirit. Whereas we tend to the utmost in subjectivity-whether it be will to good and evil in its most powerful manifestations, or constraint seeking a way out and asserting itself in torment and affliction it was the character of the Greek genius to see the realities of human existence in the eternal forms of growth and maturation, of laughter and tears, of play and earnest. Hsi attention was directed not to forces but to pure being, and the forms of human being presented themselves with such truth that he could only revere them as gods.

Among the treasures of the Terme Museum there is a head of a sleeping woman. Its timeless grandeur has been so compellingly embodied and the force of its being so-manifestly represented that any thought of symbolism or sublimation becomes a desecration. We gaze into the bared depths of being and experience an encounter with the infinite and divine. Only ancient poetry finds words that are comparable. This is how Propertius saw his slumbering love: "Like Ariadne lay swooning on the desert strand ... or like a Thracian maenad foredone by the unending dance, lies sunk in slumber on the grassy banks of Apidanus." He stood transfixed by the loftiness of perfect nature and sensed adeity too great for benevolent praise, such as Goethe felt constrained to bestow upon his beloved in a poem inspired by Propertius:

- Upon her lips dwelt calm fidelity, Upon her cheeks sweet loveliness held sway, And the innocence of a kindly heart Stirred in her gentle bosom. 

So the stature of the divine is imperceptibly transmuted into the sentimental. The vision of the Roman poet is almost terrifying, for it suddenly sweeps us from bourgeois sensibility up to the heights where the Greek divinities abide. 

However diverse the disparate traits of individual gods may be, the aspect which confronts us is one of magnificent tranquillity. No visage is dominated by a single thought or mood. None desires to proclaim a specific virtue or truth, or virtue and truth in general. Nowhere is the salient point of an event or a decision given expression in the glance of the eyes or the play of the lips. Whatever stories myth may tell about the gods, neither joy or sorrow, victory or humiliation, nor any other issue affects their existence. Marked traits of personality would only disturb the expression that mirrors the essence of life with elemental power. These figures have no history because they are. Even where they are most anthropomorphic, the primacy and eternity of their being are superhuman. A moment of absorption in this visage is like a bath of rebirth in eternal waters which wash away all human dross.

Oneness of god and man in elemental being - that is the Greek view. Here we see revealed the whole significance of the human form in which the divine was manifested to the Greek. For other peoples too the idea of the essential in man is one and the same with the recognition of godhead. But whereas these others sought the divine in the perfection of human capacities, as absolute power, wisdom, justice, or love, it offered itself to the Greek in the figure of natural man. We know that it was left for the Greek alone to look upon and comprehend man as man and that he alone could set himself the task of educating man to no other goal than to be himself. This is not an invention of philosophy: it belongs to the spirit that conceived the image of the Olympian gods and thus determined the direction of Greek thought. To this spirit man became, like trees and animals, a creature of eternal form whose pure lines are those of divinity. Instead of raising his powers and virtues to heaven by pious fantasy he perceived the outlines of divinity in the delineations of his own nature. all objections to Greek religion on the ground of anthropomorphism are therefore idle gossip. It did not make divinity human but regarded the essence of humanity es divine. "The purpose and goal of the Greeks," wrote Goethe, "is to deify man, not to humanize deity. This is not anthropomorphism but theomorphism." The most significant achievement of this theomorphism is the discovery of the primal image of man; this is the sublimest revelation of nature, and at the same time the most genuine manifestation of the divine.

The image of divinity directs man away from the personal and towards the essentiality of nature. None of its traits cals attention to itself; none tells of an ego with peculiar will, peculiar sensibility and destiny. Only a man who is touched by this reality in its loftiest and holiest sense can be drawn up to the gods in reverence and love. For this reason a true monotheism could never develop in Greece. Emphasis upon self which cannot tolerate another on the same level is alien to the Greek god. He never introduces himself to the world in such selfconscious terms as "I am so-and-so," which is so characteristic a tone for oriental deities. Even hymns of praise, which are so apt to exalt their subject to limitless heights in other respects, are mindful that he knows other gods besides himself and recognizes their high merits.

To be sure, Greek deity reveals no law to stand as an absolute body above nature. It is no holy will before which nature trembles. In it there speaks no heart to which the soul of man can render perfect devotion and trust. Its large gaze demands worship and prayer, but it maintains its own dignified distance. Ready as it may be to help, there is not inscribed upon its visage an infinite love which will be vouchsafed to man and redeem him from all his woes. Here is a more biting wind: everything great is dangerous and may confound the man who is not on his guard. In the realm of the gods there abides danger; as the eternal forms of this realm, they are themselves the danger. Often they crash into the well-ordered life of man like a storm. 

Here only vigilance and strength avail. But the vigilant finds powerful assistance. The character of the deity itself becomes his illumination. The large world, whose form the deity is, embraces the whole realm of being, from brute primal force to the serene ethereal heights of freedom; and at this highest point it reveals its perfect image. The hand of the artist has caught the image, and at sight of it our eyes can still experience the miracle of the wedding of pure nature with sublimest spirit. Divinity is and remains nature, but as nature's form it is spiritual and as its perfection it is majesty and dignity, whose rays illumine the life of man. For the Greeks this is the prime meaning of insight and intelligence. Without these the truly divine is inconceivable. It is to be expected that among the manifold forms of Homeric religion savagery, fanaticism, and ecstasy would find a place. But the ideal of intelligence stands opposed to all blind surging and to every form of excess. Other peoples have frequently thought of their gods, especially when they were war-like, as quick to anger and destructive in their wrath. Their celebrated heroes too distinguish themselves in battle by mad rage, as if they were possessed. Not so the Homeric Greeks. That their society found delight in battle and heroism is shown by the Iliad; its glorification of warriors has remained the most powerful poetry of Hellenism. But out of it there breathes a spirit which looks down with noble contempt upon blind unchaining of gigantic strength. Indeed we notice with astonishment that these men who rejoice in battle and are accustomed to perceive the basic forms of existence as a reflection of divine forms ignore the existence of a war god in the proper sense of the term.

In the statues of Aphrodite and the other gods, created by plastic art in thoroughly Homeric spirit, we perceive the thought of the Greeks: the spiritual is not alien to nature; in nature itself is born that sense which is expressed as nobility and majesty in the human figures of the gods. The natural may retain its abundance and vitality entire and yet be one with the spiritual, which desires to be nothing more than its consummation. Immediacy and bodily presence and at the same time eternal validity-that is the marvel of the Greek formulation. In this unity of nature and spirit the earthy, without forfeiting aught of its freshness and warmth, combines with the freedom of proportion and perceptivity to produce nature perfected. Measure, delicacy, taste, determine attitudes and gestures and testify to the intelligent being of the divine personage. It is impossible to associate any trace of vulgarity, offensiveness, or barbarism with the aspect of a genuine Greek likeness of a god.

But a larger ideal is revealed to mankind by the superior deities, Apollo, Athena, and Zeus. In the figure of Apollo man honors the nobility of serenity and freedom, the rays of the sun, which furnish light not for mysteries of the soul but for virile realization of life and worthy achievement. His stately bearing in the battle of the gods, the magnificent utterance with which he sent the son of Tydeus back to his place as a mortal, his flaming protest against the inhumanity of Achilles and his admonition that gentlefolk must observe measure and worth even in deep anguish-these genuine expressions of his character are amply noticed in the section devoted to him.So Athena, who so loved Tydeus that she wished to present him with the cup of immortality, turned from him with distaste as he lay dying because she deemed him degraded by a base act. Her fiery glance fell upon Achilles at the very moment when he was in danger of being carried away by a senseless act of rage unworthy of himself, and her word admonished him to guard his composure. 

Is it not indicative of a lofty ethic that she deems only the noblest masculine characters worthy of her friendship and that she makes the nearness of her spirit felt at moments of their greatest tension of energy and thought? Do not the heroic achievements of Heracles, the clever deeds of Odysseus and the trials which he so manfully withstood breathe the nobility of Athena's character? In that case we should have to understand ethics as merely the observance of certain categorical commandments and regard all else as morally indifferent. Then, at least, Athena, like the Olympian gods generally, would take interest in anything but morality. Her divinity does not oblige this immortal to watch over strictly formulated moral laws and even less to set up a canon of what must forever be called right or wrong, good or evil. How far a powerful nature may go in a given instance remains open. Nevertheless she does raise certain requirements, and through her own being she sets them up as a living ideal before the eyes of men. In a higher sense we may indeed call her moral, for she is not concerned with details but with the bearing of the whole man. From her we may recognize nature refined and capable of freedom, which neither follows impulses blindly nor is subjected to the categorical demands of a moral legislation. It is not to dutifulness or obedience that decision is allowed, but to insight and taste; and thus everywhere the intelligent is bound up with the beautiful.

Athena is here no other than the path and fulfillment of higher necessity; the trick by which she deceives the faith of Hector is the trick of fate. It is foolish to attempt to measure the enormity of this event by the gauge of morality and to demand that fate should requite fidelity and uprightness as fi it were a man dealing with his fellow-man. We are indeed appalled to see how her powers mock human insight, but out of the fateful gloom there bursts the splendor of the divine. Athena misleads Hector on the path of fate, but as goddess she recalls him to honor. When does he play a worthier rôle, before the divine intervention, when he fled as if demented, or afterwards, when he offered manly resistance?

The greatest deities, Zeus, Athena, and Apollo exhibit the ideal of ennobled manliness in threefold form. Freedom of thought and art, spiritual creativity, is wholy in the realm of masculinity and hence as deity has a purely masculine character. But the energy and drive of active life requires ilumination through the feminine if it is to be uplifted above brute force. All great men of action have a feminine trait which mitigates hardness and ennobles strength. That is the significance of the feminine in these high levels of Greek religion. But beyond this the feminine has lost its power. In the worship of the goddess Athena there is not the slightest trace of the love of women. Nietzsche has said that it was the will of the Greeks to subdue the feminine in the human, and this observation is applicable even here. Woman is more elemental than man and much more centered upon individual existence. Her physiological organism induces in her a concern with the bodily which man seldom comprehends. She deals with the whole sphere of the sensual and the concrete with a devotion and respect naturally alien to masculine sensibility. Her power lies in her presence and person. Whereas man strives for the general, the impersonal, the non-sensual, her energy is wholly concentrated upon the immediate, the personal, the present reality. Just as man worships her as his idol in the moment of ecstasy, she is herself formed by nature to feel her uniqueness and to make use of it with all her resources.

The Greek deity with its masculine temper does not assert its personality with the zeal of other gods. It does not expect that man should live only to serve it and should perform his highest achievements to glorify its person. The honor it claims is not of the exclusive sort that admits recognition of no other beside it. It rejoices in freedom of spirit and requires of human life intelligence and insight rather than devotion to specific formulae, acts, and objects. Nowhere is the difference between specifically Greek religious feeling and others more striking than in its attitude towards the elemental and towards concrete objectivity. The world of primal matter and primal force is sacred to it, but its thoughts of the divine soar far above it. Whereas in other religions and cults connection with the material in its objective reality is indissoluble, the truly masculine faith of the Greeks is committed to freedom and spirituality. This religious spirituality stands clearly revealed in the supreme divinities. Of all earthly beings only man has access to their realms. But they too are form, not absolute spirit, to which nature would stand opposed as a thing of lesser worth. None of them reveals himself in perceptions or premonitions that reach out beyond this world. None categorically differentiates between good and evil in order to master nature by prescriptions set down once and for all. Their desire is nature, which is itself consummated through insight and magnanimity. This consummation of nature itself became divine form in them, and stands forth sa perfect being above the shortcomings and transitoriness of human life. Thus once more these divinities perpetuate a quite specific reality, here a spiritual one-higher humanity.

For a spirit which craves glory rather than prosperity, the justice of divine sway is a different thing from what the husbandman or commoner intent on possessions and gain might wish it to be. A call to justice is rather a sign of a de-deification of the world. The rightful claim to prosperity which the individual believes he possesses signifies that the awareness of divine presence has declined. "Why do you complain of injustice and arraign heaven when you think you have not received your deserts? Did not your program of possessions and gain also choose, along with the justice that would strengthen you, the injustice that shatters you?" Justice does not tower above the all too human. Glory is another matter. Beyond fortune and misfortune, justice and ni- justice, love and hate, it can bestow honor upon the great man, and knows that a single moment may counterbalance a whole life. It can extend a hand to an enemy, it can see the guilty and the victim of destiny in a halo, not, however, because it loves or is humble, but because its own loftiness knows regions where measures and evaluations are futile.

## Fate 

Sometimes it is said that the gods "can do all things," but a glance at the stories of the gods shows that this is not to be taken literally. Their oneness with nature would of itself contradict their ability to do all things. That limit is death. No god can restore life to a man once dead, no will of the gods can reach into the shadowy realm of the departed. But this applies to other religions also, even to the Old Testament. The Greek view goes much further and has an additional and profounder meaning. Here the deity not only possesses no power over the dead: it cannot shield the living from the death which is determined for him. "Nor did his immortal mother save the hero divine When, falling at the Scaean gate, he fulfilled his doom." With these words Schiller's Nänie reproduces Greek thought precisely. In the Odyssey Athena herself says: "Death is certain, and when a man's fate (Moira) has come, not even the gods can save him, no matter how they love him." And Thetis prays Zeus to give her son, who is doomed to an early death, due honor, and Zeus nods assent; 'that she might ask that Achilles' life be lengthened does not occur to her, nor is it in the power of the great god to grant such a prayer. When Hector puts on the armor of Achilles, Zeus deplores his failure to realize how near he is to death, and wishes to give him glory while he may, for Hector will not survive the battle; but despite his sympathy, the dark doom itself Zeus cannot rescind. Apollo, who had so faithfully supported Hector, forsakes him when the scales of destiny show that he is doomed to death.

It is in the nature of the divine to bestow, to assist, to illumine. Sometimes it may appear that the decree of fate allots some positive good to man; but from the totality of its functions there can be no doubt that its character is not positive but negative. It sets a boundary to limit duration, catastrophe to limit prosperity, death to limit life. Catastrophe, cessation, limitation, all forms of "So far and no farther," are forms of death. And death is itself the prime meaning of fate. Whenever the name of Moira is uttered, one's first thought is of death, and it is in the inevitability of death that the idea of Moira is doubtless rooted. But where the divine is one with the abundance of life, then death must be separated from it by a wide chasm. For whatever lives regards death as the thing most alien, and cannot believe that it can be comprised in the meaning and scheme of life. Thus we can understand that the powers of life and the law of death are not the same. Thus we comprehend the unbridgeable difference which keeps them apart.

- So the gods weep, weep the goddesses all For that beauty perishes, for that perfect dies.

Experience demonstrates two things to the spirit and temper of the Greek: burgeoning life, which the deity confronts on all the paths of its development; and strict necessity, which cuts through life at the points it has itself determined. The gods belong on the side of life. In order to encounter them the living must move, go forward, be active. Then the gods encompass the living with their strength and majesty and in sudden revelation even show their heavenly countenance. Hence one who is no longer in the path of life can no longer be encountered by deity. With the dead whose whole is is a was, with the figures of the departed who are cut of from all that is present, the deity can no longer have dealings. But neither can it present itself to one whose way is to be ended. Here the two spheres intersect. What takes place at this intersection remains a mystery for rational thought. But there do arise imaginary representations which unmistakably derive from experience of life.

Men, says Zeus, blame us gods for their misfortunes, whereas they bring trouble upon themselves through their own perversity "beyond fate". This is a direct hit on an important problem of life. Human existence is struck not only by bolts of fate which are unavoidable; there are also catastrophes which, by the judgment of ordinary experience, the victim might have avoided. They are no less necessary and fated than the others, once man has committed an act pregnant with consequences. "Our city will never be destroyed by the 'fate' of Zeus ... but the citizens themselves shall destroy it by their foly." Elsewhere he says: "If you experience evil because of your perversity do not place the blame upon the gods; for it is you yourselves who have made our oppressors great."

The grief of the gods when the moment of Moira comes, and even more their resistance, which must nevertheless at once yield to resigned assent, are clear proof that two disparate realms are here opposed to one another. The sum of the matter is that gods and fate are separated from and opposed to one another because of a distinction in essence. For Homer, Moira is not a person. To be sure he speaks of its functioning, as we have noticed, in terms of a personal and acting agent. But all of these terms, in particular such images as "mighty," "compelling," "overwhelming," and even "spinning," are merely formulary and point to a conception shaped in the early period rather than to Homer's own. There is only one statement concerning their relationship to Moira: They have knowledge of it, and guide themselves according to this knowledge. Thus the primeval and popular belief in personal powers of fate was supplanted by the idea of an irrefragable order and destiny which is a factual datum for the living and personal gods and exists independently of them. But this "destiny" certainly implies no fatalistic determination of all happenings. Nowhere do we find any trace of a belief that all happenings are predetermined. Destiny means death and the great catastrophes allied to death. Death is determined for all living things, and on this principle even the power of the gods is frustrated. It is quite conceivable that a man may depart this life even before the day determined. This "exces" he may have incurred by his own guilt, specifically by affronting a deity, and in such a case it is the gods themselves who bring it about.

Limitation, cessation, is a law which is alien to life and to the gods, but life must be subject to it and the deity must yield. Beyond this limit begins the realm of the has-been, which is remote from life; its peculiar being we have examined in an earlier chapter. Such is the idea of fate as it took shape in the Homeric spirit. It denotes the negative in the world of life, whereas deity denotes the positive. Thus the contrasting idea of fate puts the idea of deity into clearer focus. 

If it were literally true that the gods consummate fate, then some god or the gods as a group would have to take the life of the man doomed. But that is not the case. Alife which is finished is always destroyed by the tutelary deity of another life which is opposed to it. When the hour of fate has arrived, something takes place that is worth our pondering. We hear that the god who had hitherto loyally attended the hero vanishes from his side. Deity and fullness of life are one. If the divine has taken its departure, life has, to be sure, not yet perished, but it has lost its genius. The negation of existence has already thrown its chill shadow over it. The immediate effects are false thoughts and blind resolves. Divine presence illumines man and preserves him from such errors. For the man whom the divine has forsaken every- thing turns to deception; for him the divine itself is transformed into the demonic-and he stumbles into a region where there is no footing. Blindness drives him defenseless into the arms of the opposing life, which is guarded by a deity.

Without theory, then, and without dogmatism a consistent view of the world, clear and meaningful, takes shape. Because it is not theoretical, because it makes no postulates, because its point of departure always follows experience and always grows out of existence itself, its apparent contradictions also prove consistent. There are indeed mysteries-and they are sa great as existence itself - but there are no mystifications, no artful transvaluations, and no compromises.

Life is movement, and in movement it encounters deity as energy, revelation, and bliss; indeed the god is himself this life. From his gifts, his benison, his illumination, fate and necessity are as different as Yea from Nay, as death from life. That he attain or create or enjoy this thing or that is not a matter of man's fate. all this belongs to life's animation, to its mysterious flower, which is at every instant of its development and enrichment natural and at the same time wonderful, orderly growth and at the same time manifestation and presence of divinity. But it is a matter of fate that life does not attain this goal or that; here or there it suffers a fall and eventually perishes - that is, must pass over to the other side of being, which no longer knows life, flowering, gods, but only necessity and limitation, to that twilit realm where instead of the present there is only the past, but where, though growth and gods are wanting, all configurations are preserved timelessly and are sent up into life as great memories.

However cold and bitter necessity may be, the grandeur of death remains as the last province of the brilliance of life and its gods. The goddess who has turned into danger and calamity now intervenes, and the fallen man may take her with him into the mute night which knows no more pulsing of the heart, no more immediacy.

The Greek conception of the divine is as broad as the world and therefore, like the world itself, in the last analysis ineffable. It presents itself to us candidly, without obfuscation and without pathos. In it mystery does not occupy the foreground, and hence it requires no creed or confession of faith: it abides serene in the depths and alows all thoughts upon it to issue in the inexpressible. Out of it we recognize a cosmic feeling of unexampled strength and abundance which, as unerringly as nature, always finds the right images. What possesses substance must be consistent, and so it comes about that despite the absence of creed we find agreement and unity; indeed we can discover a system of ideas which has never been conceptually apprehended. But behind the clarity of view stands the enigma of being, and here all is inexplicable.