---
subtitle:
date: 2023-07-04 
tags: Ancient-Greece
---

# The Iliad 

### The Rage of Achilles

The Iliad, a poem about Ilium, the rage of Peleus' son Achilles.

Homer's work is a performance, a musical event to rejoice. Although we may have our doubts about history, the Greeks who knew and loved Homer's poem had none. For them history began with a splendid Panhellenic expedition against an eastern foe, led by kings. History began with war. Greek city states were uninterruptedly at war with one another, continually surrounded by enemies who could turn into potential belligerents at the first sign of weakness. The permanence of war is ever present in Greek literature.

- the men whom Zeus decrees, from youth to old age, must wind down our brutal wars to the bitter end until we drop and die, down to the last man.

- Achilles lunged ... he stabbed his temple and cleft his helmet's cheekpiece. None of the bronze plate could hold it - boring through the metal and skull the bronze spearpoint pounded, Demoleon's brains splattered all inside his casque.

- speared him square in the back where his war-belt clasped, golden buckles clinching both halves of his breastplate - straight on through went the point and out the navel, down on his knees he dropped - screaming shrill as the world went black before him - clutched his bowels to his body, hunched and sank.

There is no attempt to gloss over the harsh realities of the work of killing. Work, or ergon, is one of Homer's words for what men do in battle. Neither is there any attempt to sentimentalize the pain and degradation of violent death.

- Meriones caught him in full retreat, he let fly with a bronze tipped arrow, hitting his right buttock up under the pelvic bone so the lance pierced the bladder. He sank on the spot, hunched in his dear companion's arms, gasping out his life as he writhed along the ground like an earthworm streched out in death, blood pooling, soaking the earth dark red.

Men die in agony, drop screaming to their knees, reaching out to beloved companions gasping their life out, clawing the ground with their hands, they die roaring raging bellowing moaning. Patroclus is concerned for the proper disposal of his body - it is the body and not the soul that homeric heros feel concern for: many of the champions who fall mortally wounded have been fighting to gain control of the corpse of a prominent foe or to save the corpse of a comrade from the enemy. 

The Iliad is a poem that celebrates the heroic values war imposes on its votaries. Warriors enjoy to the full war's intoxicating excitements, they revel in the exhultation of victory, taunt fallen adversaries with threats of exposure of his corpse. War brings glory to men, warriors are eager, yearning for battle. Charmê, combat, comes from the same root as chairô, rejoice; warriors holding the line in a desperate situation are described as charmêi gêthosunoi, rejoicing in the joy of battle.

- cowering, crouched in his fine polished chariot, crazed with fear, and the reins flew from his grip - Patroclus rising beside him stabbed his right jawbone, ramming the spearhead square between his teeth so hard he hooked him by that spearhead over the chariot-rail, hoisted, dragged the Trojan out as an angler perched on a jutting rock ledge drags some fish from the sea, some noble catch, with line and glittering bronze hook. So with the spear Patroclus gaffed him off his car, his mouth gaping round the glittering point and flipped him down facefirst, dead as he fell, his life breath blown away.

Everywhere we are conscious at one and the same time of war's ugly brutality and its terrible beauty. Violence is a permanent factor in human life. The true hero, the true subject, the center of the Iliad, is force. Force as man's instrument, force as man's master, force before which human flesh shrinks back. The human soul, in this poem, is shown always in its relation to force: swept away, blinded by the force it thinks it can direct, bent under the pressure of the force to which it is subjected. Those who had dreamed that force. thanks to progress, now belonged to the past have seen the poem as a historic document; those who can see that force, today as in the past. is at the center of all human history, find in the Iliad its most beautiful, its purest mirror.

- And so their spirits soared as they took positions down the passageways of battle all night long, and the watchfires blazed among them. Hundreds strong, as stars in the night sky glittering round the moon's briliance blaze in all their glory when the air falls to a sudden, windless calm... all the lookout peaks stand out and the jutting cliffs and the steep ravines and down from the high heavens bursts the boundless bright air and all the stars shine clear and the shepherd's heart exults - so many fires burned between the ships and the Xanthus' whirling rapids set by the men of Troy, bright against their walls.

The polis for the Greeks was the matrix of civilization, the only form of ordered social life they could understand, the exclusive form assumed by ancient Greek culture from beginning to end. The repeated appeals to accept ransom are not only indicative of Troy's immense wealth, they also remind us of Trojan attitudes: that wealth can always buy a solution.

- don't fling in my face the lovely gifts of golden Aphrodite. Not to be tossed aside, the gifts of the gods, those glories... whatever the gods give of their own free will.

But Troy is not at peace: it is under siege, and by men who mean to raze it from the face of the earth. The arts of peace are useless now. Troy will not be saved by magnanimity and tender-heartedness nor by brilliance in the courts of love. If it is to survive it will do so because of the devotion, courage and incessant efforts of warriors. Hector fights courageously, stubbornly at times exultantly in the near madness of victorious slaughter. But even this berserk fury is still the fighting spirit of the man of the polis, the protector of the community, not the individual rage for glory and booty of a Diomedes or an Achilles. When we see Achilles in battle, Homer recreates for us the irresistible violence of the man born and shaped for battle, who values life, his own included, as nothing, the killer in his own domain - lion in the bush, shark in the water - Hector's defeat and death are inevitable. 

The Iliad is a poem that lives and moves and has its being in war, in that world of organized violence in which a man justifies his existence most clearly by killing others. This violence is Achilles' native element: only in violence are his full powers exerted. He has chosen glory and death at Troy. The natural consequence of that choice is a fierce devotion to the glory which he has preffered to a long life; any diminution of that glory, any hint that he is not the center of the world of violence is an intolerable insult. When Agamemnon insults his pride he immediately draws his sword, there can only be one answer to such words; "So you can learn just how much greater I am than you." amounts to a denial of his right to exist. The honor of Achilles is more important than that of other men. 

- come friend, you too must die. Why moan about it so? Even Patroclus died, a far, far better man than you. And look, you see how handsome and powerful I am? The son of a great man, the mother who gave me life a deathless goddess. But even for me, I tell you, death and the strong force of fate are waiting. There will come a dawn or sunset or high noon when a man will take my life in battle too - flinging a spear perhaps or whipping a deadly arrow off his bow.

Homer's presentation of war: that no civillization, no matter how rich, no matter how refined, can long survive once it loses the power to meet force with equal or superior force. From the point of view of the powers that rule the universe, the gods, all the human struggles, the death of heroes, the fall of cities, are only of passing interest, to be forgotten as they are replaced by similar events played out by different actors. Troy will fall, but someday too will the cities of its conquerors. And the great war that brought glory and death to the heroes will not even be allowed to leave a mark on the landscape. Man's highest efforts,nhis struggles on the face of the earth are, from the heavenly point of view, insignificant, his huge military constructions merely a surface disturbance to be readjusted. 

How far can men whose actions so often seem to be the product of direct divine intervention be held responsible? Is there in fact any fully formed concept of free and responsible human action in Homer? It would seem at first the answer were no. Achilles refrains from killing Agamemnon because Athena forbids it. But a closer look at this and similar passages where human action is prompted by divine suggestion reveals that teh Homeric conception of divine interference is an extremely subtle one. Athena seizes Achilles by the hair just as he draws his sword, but we have been told that before he drew it he had considered the alternative. 

Events are determined, we are expressly told at the begininng of the poem and elsewhere, by the will of Zeus, who is presented in the poem to us as a figure more stable, more majestic, than the other gods. And yet on more than one occasion the will of Zeus is thwarted by fate, as in the case of Sarpedon, his beloved son. As he sees him closing in combat with Patroclus, Zeus laments "Sarpedon, the man I love the most, my own son, doomed to die at the hands of Menoetuis' son Patroclus." The other gods do not argue with Zeus, though they may try to trick him, as Hera does successfully, and he does not explain his will to them, he threatens and enforces. There are no moral questions involved, only the clash of wills, intent on manifesting their existence. 

Zeus in his sphere of power, as Aphrodite in hers, are irresistible. To be a god is to be totally absorbed in the exercise of one's own power, the fulfillment of one's own nature, unchecked by any thought of others except as obstacles to be overcome; it is to be incapable of self criticism. But there are human beings who are like this. Preeminent in their particular sphere of power, they impose their will on others with confidence, the unquestioning certainty of their own right and worth that is characteristic of the gods. Such people the Greeks called heroes; they recognized the fact that they transcended the norms of humanity by according them worship at their tombs after death. Heroes may be, usually were, destructive, violent, antisocial, but they offered assurance that in some chosen vessels humanity is capable of supreme greatness, that there are some human beings who can deny the imperatives which others obey in order to live. 

There are in the poem two beings who are godlike, Achilles and Helen. One of them, Helen, the cause of the war, is so preeminent in her sphere, so far beyond competition in her beauty, her power to enchant men, that she is a sort of human Aphrodite. In her own element she is irresistible. But she is still only a human, she feels responsible for the human misery she sees all around her, something the gods never do. When Zeus and Hera settle their quarrel about the fate of Troy, Zeus gives way but claims her acquiescence whenever he in his turn may wish to destroy a city. Not only does she accept, she actually offers him three cities, those she loves best: Argos. Sparta and Mycenae. That is how the fate of nations is decided. Human suffering counts for nothing in the settlement of divine differences. The gods feel no responsibility for the human victims of their private wars. But Helen has come at last to a full realization of the suffering she has caused; too late to undo it, but at least she can see herself in the context of humankind and shudder at her own responsibility. 

- My dear brother, dear to me, bitch that I am, vicious, scheming - horror to freeze the heart! Oh how I wish that first day my mother brought me into the light some black whirlwind had rushed me out to the mountains or into the surf where the roaring breakers crash and drag and the waves had swept me off before all this had happened!

At the beginning of the Iliad Helen has already broken out of the prison of self-absorption, but this is the point at which Achilles enters it. The Iliad shows us the origin. course and consequences of his rage, his imprisonment in a godlike, lonely, heroic fury from which all the rest of the world is excluded, and also his return to human stature. 

We are not told what is going on in the mind of his characters; we are shown. Homer, like the god Apollo at Delphi in Heraclitus' famous phrase, does not say, nor does he conceal - he indicates. The strange words Achilles utters which are sometimes construed as a repudiation of the heroic ideal in Book IX when placed in the context of the speech as a whole are not inconsistent with his devotion to honor. It is the loss of that honor, as the supreme arbiter of the war, which has driven him to such formualtions. He would still be ready to choose the life of glory had not that glory been taken away from him by Agamemnon and witheld in the absence of an apology. 

- Oh would to god - Father Zeus, Athena and lord Apollo - not one of all these Trojans could flee his death, not one, no Argive either, but we could stride from the slaughter so we could bring Troy's hallowed crown of towers toppling down around us - you and I alone. 

Achilles accepts his fate as told by his mother. Not to avenge Patroclus by killing Hector would be a renunciation of all that he stands for and has lived by, the attainment of glory, of the universal recognition that there is no man his equal among the bronze armed Acheans. 

When he returns to the front lines Agamemnon offers a feast and ceremony of reconcillitaion, but Achilles' reply is brusque and uncompromising. He is not interested in ceremonies of reconcilliation which will serve to restory Agamemnon's prestige; he is not interested in Agamemnon's excuses, still less in food; he thinks of one thing and one thing only: Hector. He is for battle now, and food at sunset, after the days work. The corpse of Patroclus makes it impossible for him to eat or drink before Hector's death avenges Patroclus and reestablishes Achilles' identity as the unchallengable, unconquerable violence of war personified.

- You talk of food? I have no taste for food - what I really crave is slaughter and blood and the choking groans of men. 

The contrast between the raw, self-absorbed fury of Achilles and the civilized responsibility and restraint of Hector is maintained to the end. It is of the people, the Trojans, that Hector is thinking of as he throws his spear at Achilles. But it is Hector who dies, and as Achilles exults over his fallen enemy, his words bring home again the fact that he is fighting for himself alone; this is the satisfaction of a personal hatred. The reconciliation with Agamemnon and the Greeks is a mere formality to him, and he is still cut off from humanity, a prisoner of his self-esteem, his obsession with honor - the imposition of his identity on all men and all things.

- Beg no more you fawning dog - begging me by my parents! Would to god my rage, my fury would drive me now to hack your flesh away and eat you raw. No man alive could keep the dog packs off you, not if they haul in ten, twenty times that ransom and pile it here before me and promise fortunes more - no not even if Dardan Priam should offer to weigh out your bulk in gold! Not even then.

At the burning of the pyre, Patroclus' memory is celebrated with funeral games - contests, simulated combat, in honor of the fallen warrior. Such was the origin, the Greeks believed, of all the great games - the Olympian, the Pythian, the Isthmian, the Nemean Games and in Homer himself we hear of the funeral games for Amarynceus of Elis and for Oedipus of Thebes. The most striking feature of the account of the games is the behavior of Achilles. This seems to be a different man. It is the great Achilles of the later aristocratic tradition, the man of princely courtesy and innate nobility visible in every aspect of his bearing and conduct, the Achilles who was raised by the centaur Chiron. It is a vision of what Achilles might have been in peace, if peace had been a possibility in the heroic world. 

Homer's Achilles is clearly the model for the tragic hero of the Sophoclean stage; his stubborn, passionate devotion to an ideal image of self is the same force that drives Antigone. Oedipus, Ajax and Philoctetes to the fulfillment of their destinies. Homer's Achilles is also, for archaic Greek society, the essence of the aristocratic ideal, the paragon of male beauty, courage and patrician manners- "the splendor running in the blood," says Pindar, in a passage describing Achilles' education in the cave of the centaur Chiron.

(Note-to-self: Go through this document and add the links)

### Some Favorite Passages

- The warlords dear to the gods and flanking Agamemnon strode on ahead, marshaling men-at-arms in files, and down their ranks the fiery-eyed Athena bore her awesome shield of storm, ageless, deathless- a hundred golden tassels, all of them braided tight and each worth a hundred oxen, float along the front. Her shield of lightning dazzling, swirling around her, headlong on Athena swept through the Argive armies, driving soldiers harder, lashing the fighting-fury in each Achaean's heart-no stopping them now, mad for war and struggle. Now, suddenly, battle thrilled them more than the journey home, than sailing hollow ships to their dear native land.

- As ravening fire rips through big stands of timber high on a mountain ridge and the blaze flares miles away, so from the marching troops the blaze of bronze armor, splendid and superhuman, flared across the earth flashing into the air to hit the skies.

-  Now with the squadrons marshaled, captains leading each, the Trojans came with cries and the din of war like wildfowl when the long hoarse cries of cranes sweep on against the sky and the great formations flee from winter's grim ungodly storms, flying in force. Shrieking south to the ocean gulfs, speeding blood and death to the Pygmy warriors, launching at daybreak savage battle down upon their heads. But Achaea's armies came on strong in silence, breathing combat-fury, hearts ablaze to defend each other to the death.

- Soon as the warrior Menelaus marked him, Paris parading there with his big loping strides, flaunting before the troops, Atrides thrilled like a lion lighting on some handsome carcass, lucky to find an antlered stag or wild goat just as hunger strikes-he rips it, bolts it down, even with running dogs and lusty hunters rushing him. So Menelaus thrilled at heart-princely Paris there, right before his eyes. The outlaw, the adulterer ... "Now for revenge!" he thought, and down he leapt from his chariot fully armed and hit the ground.

- She knew the goddess at once, the long lithe neck, the smooth full breasts and the fire in those eyes- and she was amazed, she burst out with her name: "Maddening one, my Goddess, oh what now? Lusting to lure me to my ruin yet again? Where will you drive me next? Offand away to other grand, luxurious cities, out to Phrygia, out to Maeonia's tempting country? Have you a favorite mortal man there too?

- "Don't provoke me-wretched, headstrong girl! Or in my immortal rage I may just toss you over, hate you as I adore you now-with a vengeance. I might make you the butt of hard, withering hate from both sides at once, Trojans and Achaeans- then your fate can tread you down to dust!"

- But swear to Apollo, Wolf-god, glorious Archer, you'll slaughter splendid victims, newborn lambs when you march home to Zelea's sacred city."

- Your cup stands filled, always, brimmed like mine when the will stirs you to drink- so now drink deep of battle. Be that fighter you claimed to be in all the years gone by."

- At last the armies clashed at one strategic point, they slammed their shields together, pike scraped pike with the grappling strength of fighters armed in bronze and their round shields pounded, boss on welded boss, and the sound of struggle roared and rocked the earth. Screams of men and cries of triumph breaking in one breath, fighters killing, fighters killed, and the ground streamed blood. Wildly as two winter torrents raging down from the mountains, swirling into a valley, hurl their great waters together, flash floods from the wellsprings plunging down in a gorge and miles away in the hills a shepherd hears the thunder- so from the grinding armies broke the cries and crash of war.

- Then Pallas Athena granted Tydeus' son Diomedes strength and daring - so the fighter would shine forth and tower over the Argives and win himself great glory. She set the man ablaze, his shield and helmet flaming with tireless fire like the star that flames at harvest, bathed in the ocean, rising up to outshine all other stars. Such fire Athena blazed from Tydides' head and shoulders, drove him into the center where the masses struggled on.

- Tydides prayed and Athena heard his prayer, put spring in his limbs, his feet, his fighting hands and close beside him winged him on with a flight of orders: "Now take heart, Diomedes, fight it out with the Trojans. Deep in your chest I've put your father's strength. He never quaked, that Tydeus, that great horseman- what force the famous shieldsman used to wield! Look, I've lifted the mist from off your eyes that's blurred them up to now- so you can tell a god from man on sight. So now if a god comes up to test your mettle, you must not fight the immortal powers head-on, all but one of the deathless gods, that is- if Aphrodite daughter of Zeus slips into battle, she's the one to stab with your sharp bronze spear!" Her eyes bright, Athena soared away and Tydeus' son went charging back to the front line of champions. Now, long ablaze as he was to fight the Trojans, triple the fury seized him- claw mad as a lion some shepherd tending woolly flocks in the field has just grazed, a lion leaping into the fold, but he hasn't killed him, only spurred his strength and helpless to beat him off the man scurries for shelter, leaving his flocks panicked, lost as the ramping beast mauls them thick-and-fast. piling corpse on corpse and in one furious bound clears the fenced yard- so raging Diomedes mauled the Trojans.

- Pallas Athena seized the reins and whip, lashing the racing horses straight at Ares. The god was just stripping giant Periphas bare, the Aetollans' best fighter, Ochesius' noble son- the blood-smeared Ares was tearing off his gear but Athena donned the dark helmet of Death so not even stark Ares could see her now. But the butcher did see Tydeus' rugged son and he dropped gigantic Periphas on the spot where he'd just killed him, ripped his life away and Ares whirled at the stallion-breaking Diomedes - the two of them dosing fast, charging face-to-face and the god thrust first, over Tydides' yoke and reins, with bronze spear burning to take the fighter's life. But Athena, her eyes afire, grabbed the flying shaft, flicked it over the car and off it flew for nothing - and after him Diomedes yelled his war cry, lunging out with his own bronze spear and Pallas rammed it home, deep in Ares' bowels where the belt cinched him tight. There Diomedes aimed and stabbed, he gouged him down his glistening flesh and wrenched the spear back out and the brazen god of war let loose a shriek, roaring, thundering loud as nine, ten thousand combat soldiers shriek with Ares' fury when massive armies clash. A shudder swept all ranks, Trojans and Argives both, terror-struck by the shriek the god let loose, Ares whose lust for slaughter never dies.

- Athena, child of Zeus whose shield is thunder, letting fall her supple robe at the Father's threshold rich brocade, stitched with her own hands' labor- donned the battle-shirt of the lord of lightning, buckled her breastplate geared for wrenching war. Then onto the flaming chariot Pallas set her feet and seized her spear - weighted heavy, the massive shaft she wields to break the battle lines of heroes the mighty Father's daughter storms against.

- My son, victory is what Athena and Hera will give, if they so choose. But you, you hold in check that proud, fiery spirit of yours inside your chest! Friendship is much better. Vicious quarrels are deadly- put an end to them, at once. Your Achaean comrades, young and old, will exalt you all the more:

- "Is that an order? Pick my own comrade? Then how could I pass up royal Odysseus here? His heart's so game, his fighting edge so keen, the best of us all in every combat mission - Athena loves the man. With him at my side we'd go through fire and make it back alive - no one excels the mastermind of battle."

- "Hear me, daughter of Zeus whose shield is thunder! Standing by me always, in every combat mission - no maneuver of mine slips by you now, again, give me your best support, Athena, comrade! Grant our return in glory back to the warships once we've done some feat that brings the Trojans pain!"

- Their prayers rose and Pallas Athena heard them. Once they'd appealed to Zeus's mighty daughter, into the black night they went like two lions stalking through the carnage and the corpses, through piles of armor and black pools of blood.

- Quick as a flash he sprang, fleeing for dear life - they sprang in pursuit as a pair of rip-tooth hounds bred for the hunt and flushing fawn or hare through a woody glen keep closing for the kill, nonstop and the prey goes screaming on ahead - so Odysseus raider of cities and Diomedes cut him off from his own lines, coursing him, closing nonstop with the Trojan about to break in on the line of sentries, racing fast for the ships - when Athena poured fresh strength in Tydeus' son so no Achaean could beat him out for the glory of hitting Dolon first, Diomedes came in second. Rushing him with his spear in a sudden surge Tydides shouted. "Stop or I'll run you through! You'll never escape my spear-headlong death - I swear I'll send it hurling from my fist!"

- With that, just as Dolon reached up for his chin to cling with a frantic hand and beg for life, Diomedes struck him square across the neck- a flashing hack of the sword-both tendons snapped and the shrieking head went tumbling in the dust.

- Athena, eyes blazing, breathed fury in Diomedes and he went whirling into the slaughter now, hacking left and right and hideous groans broke from the dying Thracians slashed by the sword - the ground ran red with blood. As a lion springs on flocks unguarded, shepherd gone, pouncing on goats or sheep and claw-mad for the kill, so Tydeus' son went tearing into that Thracian camp until he'd butchered twelve... A nightmare hovered above his head that night- Diomedes himself! sped by Athena's battle-plan.

- Charging in full fury, full face, straight into Agarnemnon's spearhead ramming sharp - the rim of the bronze helmet could not hold it, clean through heavy metal and bone the point burst and the brains splattered all inside the casque.

- Think how a lion, mauling the soft weak young of a running deer, clamped in his massive jaws, cracks their backbones with a snap - she's stormed in, invading the lair to tear their tender hearts out and the mother doe, even if she's close by, what can she do to save her fawns? She's helpless- terrible trembling racks her body too-and suddenly off she bounds through the glades and the thick woods, drenched in sweat, leaping clear of the big eat's pounce. So not a single Trojan could save those two from death, they fled themselves before the Argive charge.

- Yet stragglers still stampeded down the plain like cattle driven wild by a lion lunging in pitch darkness down on the whole herd but to one alone a sudden death comes flashing- first he snaps its neck, clamped in his huge jaws, then down in gulps he bolts its blood and guts.

- The old horseman Peleus urging his son Achilles, 'Now always be the best, my boy, the bravest, and hold your head up high above the others"

- That splendid shield he gripped before his chest and shaking a pair of spears went stalking out like a mountain lion starved for meat too long and the lordly heart inside him fires him up to raid some stormproof fold, to go at the sheep, and even if he should light on herdsmen at the spot, guarding their flocks with dogs and bristling spears, the marauder has no mind to be driven off that steading, not without an attack. All or nothing - he charges flocks and hauls off bloody prey or he's run through himself at the first assault with a fast spear driven home.

- If we all formed up along the ships right now, our best men picked for an ambush - that's where you really spot a fighter's mettle, where the brave and craven always show their stripes. The skin of the coward changes calor all the time, he can't get a grip on himself. he can't sit still, he squats and rocks, shifting his weight from foot to foot, his heart racing. Pounding inside the fellow's ribs, his teeth chattering-he dreads some grisly death. But the skin of the brave soldier never blanches. He's all control. Tense but no great fear. The moment he joins his comrades packed in ambush he prays to wade in carnage, cut-and-thrust at once.

- As gale winds swirl and shatter under the shrilling gusts on days when drifts of dust lie piled thick on the roads and winds whip up the dirt in a dense whirling cloud - so the battle broke, storming chaos, troops inflamed, slashing each other with bronze, carnage mounting, manslaughtering combat bristling with rangy spears, the honed lances brandished in hand and ripping flesh and the eyes dazzled now, blind with the glare of bronze, glittering helmets flashing, breastplates freshly burnished, shields fiery in sunlight, fighters plowing on in a mass. Only a veteran steeled at heart could watch that struggle and still thrill with joy and never feel the terror.

- Both gods knotted the rope of strife and leveling war, strangling both sides at once by stretching the mighty cable, never broken. never slipped, that snapped the knees of thousands.

- Call up the joy of war!

- The force of fire, quenchless, ravening fire, yes!

- Like a murderous lion mad for kills, charging cattle grazing across the flats of a broad marshy pasture, flocks by the hundred led by an unskilled herdsman helpless to keep the marauder off a longhorn heifer - no fighting that bloody slaughter - all he can do is keep pace with the lead or straggling heads, leaving the center free for the big eat's pounce and it eats a heifer raw as the rest stampede away.

- "Be men, my friends! Discipline fill your hearts, maintain your pride in the eyes of other men! Remember, each of you, sons, wives, wealth, parents- are mother and father dead or alive? No matter, I beg you for their sakes, loved ones far away- now stand and fight, no turning back, no panic." With that he put new strength in each man's spirit. Athena thrust from their eyes the blinding battle-haze, the darkness sent by the gods, and a hard bright light burst down in both directions, out to the ships and down the lines where fighting drew dead even.

- "Friends! Fighting Danaans! Aides-in-arms of Ares! Fight like men, my comrades-call up your battle-fury! You think we have reserves in the rear to back us up? Some stronger wall to shield our men from disaster? No, there's no great citadel standing near with towers where wecould defend ourselves and troops could turn the tide. No-we're here on the plain of Troy-all Troy's in arms! Dug in, backs to the sea, land of our fathers far away! Fight-the light of safety lies in our fighting hands, not spines gone soft in battle!"

- Prince Achilles, ranging his ranks of Myrmidons, arrayed them along the shelters, all in armor. Hungry as wolves that rend and bolt raw flesh, hearts filled with battle-frenzy that never dies - off on the cliffs, ripping apart some big antlered stag they gorge on the kill till all their jaws drip red with blood, then down in a pack they lope to a pooling, dark spring, their lean sharp tongues lapping the water's surface, belching bloody meat, but the fury, never shaken, builds inside their chests though their glutted bellies burst.

- Brave Patroclus first - just as Areilycus swerved in sudden flight he gored him in the hip with a slashing spear and the bronze lancehead hammered through his flesh. The shaft splintering bone as he pitched face-first, pounding the ground.

- Idomeneus skewered Erymas straight through the mouth, the merciless brazen spearpoint raking through, up under the brain to split his glistening skull- teeth shattered out, both eyes brimmed to the lids with a gush of blood and both nostrils spurting, mouth gaping, blowing convulsive sprays of blood and death's dark cloud closed down around his corpse. So in a rush each Argive captain killed his man, as ravenous wolves come swooping down on lambs or kids to snatch them away-from right amidst their flock - all lost when a careless shepherd leaves them straggling down the hills and quickly spotting a chance the wolf pack picks them off, no heart for the fight-so the Achaeans mauled the Trojans.

- Patroclus rising beside him stabbed his right jawbone, ramming the spearhead square between his teeth so hard he hooked him by that spearhead over the chariot-rail, hoisted, dragged the Trojan out as an angler perched on a jutting rock ledge drags some fish from the sea, some noble catch, with line and glittering bronze hook.

- Struggling for breath, you answered. Patroclus O my rider, "Hector! Now is your time to glory to the skies ... now the victory is yours. A gift of the son of Cronus, Zeus - Apollo too - they brought me down with all their deathless ease, they are the ones who tore the armor off my back. Even if twenty Hectors had charged against me - they'd all have died here, laid low by my spear. No, deadly fate in league with Apollo killed me. From the ranks of men, Euphorbus, You came third, and all you could do was finish off my life ... One more thing-take it to heart, I urge you- you too, you won't live long yourself, I swear. Already I see them looming up beside you-death and the strong force of fate, to bring you down at the hands of Aeacus' great royal son ... Achilles!"

- Zeus who strikes fear in even the bravest man of war and tears away his triumph, all in a lightning flash, and at other times he will spur a man to battle.

- Her gray eyes afire, the goddess Pallas thrilled that the man had prayed to her before all other gods.

- And with that the red-hatred captain moved ahead like an eagle scanning left and right, the bird men say has the sharpest eyes of all that fly the heavens: high as he soars he'll never miss the racing hare cowering down low in the dense, shaggy brush- down on its head he swoops and pins it fast and rips its life away.

- And Iris racing the wind went veering off as Achilles, Zeus's favorite fighter, rose up now and over his powerful shoulder Pallas slung the shield, the tremendous storm-shield with all its tassels flaring- and crowning his head the goddess swept a golden cloud and from it she lit a fire to blaze across the field.

- The god of war is impartial: he hands out death to the man who hands out death."

- Intelligence fills their hearts, voice and strength their frames, from the deathless gods they've learned their works of hand.

- Great Achilles who held back from the brutal fighiing so long had just come blazing forth. Chilling tremors shook the Trojans' knees, down to the last man, terrified at the sight: the headlong runner coming, gleaming in all his gear, afire like man-destroying Ares. But once the Olympians merged with mortal fighters. Strife the mighty driver of armies rose in strength and Athena bellowed her stunning war cry-standing now at the edge of the deep-dug trench outside the rampart, now at thundering cliffs she loosed her vibrant cry.

- Achilles rearing like some lion out on a rampage, and a whole town of men has geared for the hunt to cut him down: but at first he lopes along, all contempt, till one of the fast young hunters spears him - then ... crouched for attack, his jaws gaping, over his teeth the foam breaks out, deep in his chest the brave heart groans, he lashes his ribs, his flanks and hips with his tail, he whips himself into fighting-fury, eyes glaring, hurls himself head-on-kill one of the men or die, go down himself at the first lethal charge!

- And next Achilles lunged at Demoleon, son of Antenor, a tough defensive fighter - he stabbed his temple and cleft his helmet's cheekpiece. None of the bronze plate could hold it-boring through the metal and skull the bronze spearpoint pounded, Demoleon's brains splattered all inside his casque, the Trojan beaten down in his fury. 

- Achilles speared him square in the back where his war-belt clasped, golden buckles clinching both halves of his breastplate- straight onthrough went the point and out the navel, down on his knees he dropped- screaming shrill as tile world went black before him- clutched his bowels to his body, hunched and sank.

- Achilles now like inhuman fire raging on through the mountain gorges splinter-dry, setting ablaze big stands of timber, the wind swirling the huge fireball left and right - chaos of fires - Achilles storming on with brandished spear like a frenzied god of battle trampling all he killed and the earth ran black with blood. Thundering on, on like oxen broad in the brow some field hand yokes to crush white barley heaped on a well-laid threshing floor and the grain is husked out fast by the bellowing oxen's hoofs- so as the great Achilles rampaged on, his sharp-hoofed stallions trampled shields and corpses, axle under his chariot splashed with blood, blood on the handrails sweeping round the car, sprays of blood shooting up from the stallions' hoofs and churning, whirling rims-and the son of Peleus charioteering on to seize his glory, bloody filth splattering both strong arms, Achilles' invincible arms

- But now for total war, bearing down on the other gods, disastrous, massive, their fighting-fury blasting loose from opposing camps- the powers collided! A mammoth clash-the wide earth roared and the arching vault of heaven echoed round with trumpets And Zeus heard the chaos, throned on Olympus heights, and laughed deep in his own great heart, delighted to see the gods engage in all-out conflict.

- Pallas hurled that boundary-stone at Ares, struck his neck, loosed his limbs, and down he crashed and out over seven acres sprawled the enormous god and his mane dragged in the dust, his armor dashed around him. Athena laughed aloud, glorying over him, winging insults: "Colossal fool- it never even occurred to you, not even now when you matched your strength with mine, just how much greater I claim to be than you!

- But the distant deadly Archer volleyed back, "God of the earthquake - you'd think me hardly sane if I fought with you for the sake of wretched mortals ... like leaves, no sooner flourishing, full of the sun's fire, feeding on earth's gifts, then they waste away and die. Stop, Call off this skirmish of ours at once - let these mortals fight themselves to death."

- He'd fight to the death as a panther springs forth from her thicket lair to stand and face the huntsman: no fear in her heart, no thought of flight when she hears the baying packs- and even if he's too quick with spear or lunging sword, even if she's run through, she never slacks her fury until she's charged him hard or gone down fighting.

- At last our hopes run high, my brilliant Achilles- Father Zeus must love you- we'll sweep great glory back to Achaea's fleet, we'll kill this Hector, mad as he is for battle! No way for him to escape us now, no longer- not even if Phoebus the distant deadly Archer goes through torments, pleading fer Hector's life, groveling over and over before our storming Father Zeus. But you, you hold your ground and catch your breath, while I run Hector down and persuade the man to fight you face-to-face."

- "Hector, stop! You unforgivable, you ... don't talk to me of pacts. There are no binding oaths between men and lions- no wolves and lambs can enjoy no meeting of the mindsc- they are all bent on hating each other to the death. So with you and me. No love between us. No truce till one or the other falls and gluts with blood Ares who hacks at men behind his rawhide shield. Come, call up whatever courage you can muster. Life or death-now prove yourself a spearman, a daring man of war! No more escape for you- Athena will kill you with my spear in just a moment. Now you'll pay at a stroke for all my comrades' grief, all you killed in the fury of your spear!"

- Bright as that star amid the stars in the night sky, star of the evening, brightest star that rides the heavens, so fire flared from the sharp point of the spear Achilles brandished high in his right hand, bent on Hector's death, scanning his splendid body-where to pierce it best?

- Godlike Achilles gloried over him: "Hector-surely you thought when you stripped Patroclus' arrnor that you, you would be safe! Never a fear of me - far from the fighting as I was-you fool! Left behind there, down by the beaked ships his great avenger waited, a greater man by far- that man was I, and I smashed your strength! And you- the dogs and birds will maul you, shame your corpse while Achaeans bury my dear friend in glory!"

- Like some lion going his own barbaric way, giving in to his power, his brute force and wild pride, as down he swoops on the flocks of men to seize his savage feast.