---
subtitle:
date: 2022-12-06
tags: Reading-Notes
---

# On Naïve and Sentimental Poetry

## Notes:
- Our enjoyment of nature is not aesthetic but rather moral. What explains our many fondness for flowers and animals, for simple gardens, for walks and for the land? It is not nature in itself that gives us pleasure but rather an idea portrayed by them that we cherish in them. We treasure the silent creativity of life in them, the fact that they act serenely on their own, being there according to their own laws; we cherish that inner necessity, the eternal oneness with themselves. Nature in this mode of contemplation is for us nothing other than voluntary existence, subsistence of things through themselves, existence according to its own unalterable laws.
- This conception is necessary, since upon the discovery of imitation of naivety in morals or artificial deception of flowers or bird songs, such the feeling that we describe is destroyed. Our pleasure comes through an idea, not solely upon observation, also its by no means dependent upon the beauty of forms. What would even a plain flower, a spring, a mossy stone, the chirping of birds, the buzzing of bees, etc., have in itself so charming for us? What could give it any claim upon our love? It is not these objects, it is an idea represented through them, which we love in them. We love in them the quietly working life, the calm effects from out itself, existence under its own laws, the inner necessity, the eternal unity with itself. 
- They are what we were; they are what we ought to become once more. We were nature as they, and our culture should lead us back to nature, upon the path of reason and freedom. They are therefore at the same time a representation of our lost childhood, which remains eternally most dear to us; hence, they fill us with a certain melancholy. At the same time, they are representations of our highest perfection in the ideal, hence, they transpose us into a sublime emotion, a pain of longing for lost unity with the pleasure of having an advantage that they lack. 
- We characterize naïveté by purity, simplicity, directness, ease. The naïve poet simply imitates nature, with an unreflective treatment to his object, a single relation that he has no choice over. Modern man has developed a strong ability for rational self reflection and is keenly aware of his separation from nature, a disntiction that was much less prevalent to the ancient Greeks. The Greeks portrayal of nature contains no special involvement of the heart, he does not cling to nature with the fervor, sensitivity, and sweet melancholy that we moderns do. The ancient poets had not lost nature and thus had no need to rediscover it. 
- In contrast to the naïve poet's direct relation to nature, the sentimental poet forgrounds her own perspective and reflection, precipitating a shift from objects to thought: whereas naïve poets touch us through nature, modern poets touch us through ideas. The sentimental poet communicates not her feelings but her thoughts about her feelings, she reflects upon the impressions that objects make on her. Having recounted a heroic deed, a sentimental poet would hardly have waited to testify her delight at her action, and we, the sentimental audience, would pause in our hearts while reading and eagerly distance ourselves from the subject matter in order to look at ourselves. By contrast, there is not a trace of this in Homer, a naïve poet, who simply recounts events directly, leaving his own response aside. 
- Despite our longning for the simplicity represented by the naïve view, the sentimental view represents a higher development of human potential. The ultimate ideal is a kind of unity of unity and division, a “structure of immediacy, its negation, and their unity” that approaches the complex harmony that is a perpetual aspiration in Schiller’s worldview. The interplay with the computer makes this entwined and quantic, a constantly changing synthesis of the two ...[]
