---
subtitle:
date: 2023-05-24
tags: Ancient-Greece
---

# The Pre-Socratics

### Thales

Greek philosophy seems to begin with the proposition that water is the primal origin of all things. We take serious this proposition because it tells us something about the primal origin of all things; because it does so in a language devoid of image or fable; and because embryonically contained in this proposition is the thought that all things are one. Thales ventures to step out of the company of the religious and superstitious and shows him as a natural scentist and the first Greek philosopher. 

Philosophy leaps ahead on tiny toe-holds; hope and intuition lend wings to its feet. Calculating reason lumbers heavily behind, looking for better footholds, for reason too wants to reach that alluring goal which its divine comrade has long since reached.

What then is it that brings philosophical thinking so quickly to its goal? Is it different from the thinking that calculates and measures, only by virtue of the greater rapidity with which it transcends all space? No, its feet are propelled by an alien, illogical power-the power of creative imagination. Lifted by it, it leaps from possibility to possibility, using each one as a temporary resting place. Occasionally it will grasp such a resting place even as it flies. Creative premonition will show the place; imagination guesses from afar that here it will find a demonstrable resting place. But the special strength of imagination is its lightning quick seizure and illumination of analogies. Subsequent reflection comes with measuring devices and routinizing patterns and tries to replace analogy with equation and synchronicity with causality. But even if this should not work, even in a case such as that of Thales, non-provable philosophic thinking has its value. Even if all the footholds have crumbled by the time logic and empiric rigidity want to cross over to such a proposition as "all is water," even after the total demolition of any scientific edifice, something remains. And in this remainder lies an impelling force which is the hope of future fruitfulness.

Man for the Greeks was the truth and core of all things, everything else was but semblance and the play of illusion; (this is why the values of Thales' thought lies in the fact that it was meant non-mythically and non-allegorically). For this very reason they found it unbelievably difficult to comprehend concepts as such. Herein they were the exact opposite of modern men. For us, even the most personal is sublimated back into an abstraction; for them the greatest abstraction kept running back into a person. Thales said "Not man, but water, is the reality of all things." He begins to believe in nature by believing in at least water. He had turned cold against everything mythical and allegorical but not yet reaching the pure abstraction "all things are one", instead remaining at a concrete expression of it. An alien rarity among the Greeks of his time. Thales begins to see into the depths of nature without the help of fantastical fable. [homeric-gods] Wandering versus understanding.

### Anaximander

Anaximander, the first philosophical author of the ancients, writes exactly as one expects a typical philosopher to write when alienating demands have not yet robbed him of his innocence and naivete. That is to say, in graven stylized letters, sentence after sentence the witness to fresh illumination, each the expression of time spent in sublime meditation.

"Where the source of things is, to that place they must also pass away, according to necessity, for they must pay penance and be judged for their injustices, in accordance with the ordinance of time." It may not be logical, but it certainly is human, to view all coming-to-be as though it were an illegitimate emancipation from eternal being, a wrong for which destruction is the only penance. That which truly is, cannot posses definite characteristics, or it would come-to-be and pass away like all the other things. In order that coming-to-be shall not cease, primal being must be indefinite. The immortality and everlastingness of primal being does not lie in its infinitude or its inexhaustibility, but in the fact that it is devoid of definite qualities that would lead to its passing. Hence its name, "the indefinite." Thus named, the primal being is superior to that which comes to be, insuring thereby eternity and the unimpeded course of coming-to-be. (Note-to-self: death, ghost in the shell, the tree of life, change, capital, thermodynamic god). This ultimate unity of the indefinite, the womb of all things, can be designated by human speech only as a negative, as something to which the existent world of coming-to-be can give no predicate. We may look upon it as the equal of the Kantian ding an sich. 

When Anaximander saw in the multiplicity of things that have come-to-be a sum of injustices that must be expiated, he grasped the question of how can anything pass away which has a right to be. "What is your existence worth? And if it is worthless, why are you here? Your guilt causes you to tarry in your existence. With your death, you have to expiate it. Look how your earth is withering, how your seas are diminishing and drying up; the seashell on the mountain top can show you how much has dried up already. Even now, fire is destroying your world; some day it will go up in fumes and smoke. But ever anew, another such world of ephemerality will construct itself. Who is there that could redeem you from the curse of coming-to-be?"

Thales demonstrated the need to simplify the realm of the many, to reduce it to the mere unfolding or masking of the one and only. Anaximander takes two steps beyond him. He asks how is the many possible if there is such a thing as the eternal one? And he takes his answer from the self-contradictory, self consuming and negating character of the many. Its existence becomes for him a moral phenomenon. It is not justified, but expiates itself forever through its passing. But why has not all that came to be passed away long since, since a whole eternity of time has passed? Whence the ever renewed stream of coming to be? Eternal coming-to-be can only have its origin in eternal being; the conditions for the fall from being to coming-to-be in injustice are forever the same; the constellation of things is such that no end can be envisaged for the emergence of individual creatures from the womb of the indefinite. 

The particular word choice of 'injustice' has great importance here. Existence itself is not a sin - this is a non-Greek idea.The words are a personification of the strife between things, which we compare to a lawsuit amongst men. In the Ionian city-state there is a marlet-place where suits are heard and decisions are given; and the judge sitting on the bench to ordain the compensation to be paid. The judge is time, his power is inevitable - whom we know from Solon's political poetry. Diké does not depend on human, earthly justice, nor does she act by sudden temporary strokes of divine punishment as the old religion of Hesiod held; her power is immanent, manifested in the process by which all inequlities compensate themselves in time; and that inevitable process is the 'punishment of Zeus' or 'divine requital'. Anaximander radicalizes this - that the eternal process of compensation is at work not only in human life but in the whole world. 

This is not necessarily the dawn of an idea that all nature is subject to universal laws, Anaximander was not thinking of a monotonous causal series which modern scientists construct - he was forming a moral, not physical law of nature. There is a deeply religious meaning in his conception that natural phenomena are goverened by a moral standard. It is not a description of events but a justification of the nature of the universe: he shows creation to be a cosmos 'writ large' - a community of things under law. Solon's ethico-legal conception of responsibility and retribution was derived from epic-theodicy; similarly Anaximander's doctrine of the systematic justice of the universe - the idea of cause and retribution - was transferred from legal to physical terminology. His idea of Diké is the first stage in the projection of life in the city-state upon the life of the universe. 

### Heraclitus

"Becoming is what I contemplate, and noone else has watched so attentively this everlasting wavebeat and rhythm of things. And what did I see? Lawful order, unfailing certainties, ever-like orbits of lawfulness, Erinnyes sitting in judgement on all transgressions against lawful order, the whole world the spectacle of sovereign justice and of the demonically ever-present natural forces that serve it. Not the punishment of what has come-to-be did I see, but the justification of that which is coming-into-being."

Heraclitus denies the duality of totally diverse worlds - a position which Anaximander had been compelled to assume. He no longer distinguished a physical world from a metaphysical one, a realm of definite qualities from an undefinable indefinite. Heraclitus altogether denied being. For this one world which he retained - supported by eternal unwritten laws, flowing upward and downward in brazen rythmic beat - nowhere shows a tarrying, an indestructibility, a bulwark in the stream. "I see nothing other than becoming. Be not deceived. It is the fault of your myopia, not the nature of things, if you think you see land somewhere in the ocean of coming-to-be and passing away. You use names for things as though they rigidly, persistently endured; yet even the stream which you step into a second time is not the one you stepped into before."

The conditions which alone make any experience of this world possible: time and space are condition, have but a relative existence, that each thing exists through and for another thing like it. The whole nature of reality lies simply in its acts and that for it there exists no other sort of being. The everlasting and exclusive coming-to-be, the impermanence of everything actual, which constantly acts and comes-to-be but never is. 

Everlastingly, a given quality contends against itself and separates into opposites; everlastingly these opposites seek to re-unite. The world is a mixed drink which must constantly be stirred. The strife of opposites gives birth to all that comes-to-be; the definite qualities which look permanent to us express but the momentary ascendency of one partner. Everything that happens, happens in accordance with this strife, and it is just in the strife that eternal justice is revealed. It is a wonderful idea, welling up from the purest springs of Hellenism, the idea that strife embodies the everlasting sovereignty of strict justice, bound to everlasting laws. The fundament of a cosmology, it is the contest-idea of the Greek individual and the Greek state, taken from the gymnasium and the palaestra, from the artists agon, from the contests between political parties and between cities - all transformed into universal application so that now the wheels of the cosmos turn on it. Just as the Greek individual fought as though he alone were right and an infinitely sure measure of judicial opinion were determining the trend of victory at any given moment, so the qualities wrestle with one another, in accordance with inviolable laws and standards that are immanent in the struggle. The things in whose definiteness and endurance narrow human minds, like animal minds, believe have no real existence. They are but the flash and spark of drawn swords, the quick radiance of victory in the struggle of the opposites.

"The struggle of the many is pure justice itself! In fact, the one is the many. For what are all those qualities, in essence? Are they immortal gods? Are they separate beings, acting on and in themselves, from the beginning and without end? And if the world which we see knows only coming to be and passing away, but no tarrying, is it possible that those qualities might constitute a different kind of world? Not a world of unity, to be sure, such as Anaximander sought beyond the fluttering veils of the many, but a world of eternal substantive multiplicities?" The many perceivable qualities are neither eternal substances nor fantasms of our senses; they are neither rigid autocratic being nor fleeting semblance flitting through human minds. "The world is a game Zeus plays"; "of the fire with itself. This is the only sense in which the one is at the same time the many."

Heraclitus believes, like Anaximander, in a periodically repeated end of the world, and in an ever renewed rise of another world out of the all destroying cosmic fire. The period in which the world hurries toward the conflagration and dissolves into pure fire Heraclitus characterizes as a desire, a want, or lack; the full consumption in fire he calls satiety. Do guilt, injustice, contradiction and suffering exist in this world? They do, proclaims Heraclitus, but only for the limited human mind which sees things apart but not connected, not for the con-tuitive god. All contradictions run into harmony, invisible to the common human eye, yet understandable to the one who is related to the contemplative god. Before his fire-gaze not a drop of injustice remanins in the world poured all around him; even that cardinal impulse that allwos pure fire to inhabit such impure forms is mastered with such a sublime metaphor. In this world only play, play as artists and children engage in it, exhibits coming to be and passing away, structuring and destroying, without any moral additive, in forever equal innocence. As children and artists play, so plays the ever living fire, contructing and destroying all in innocence. An instant of satiety - and again it is seized by its need, as the artist is seized by his need to create. Not hybris but the ever self-renewing impulse to play calls new worlds into being. It is all a game, dont take it so pathetically and dont make morality out of it. 

No all-powerful feeling of compassionate emotions, no desire to help, to heal, to save, stream forth from Heraclitus. He is a star devoid of atmosphere. His eye, flaming toward its inward center, looks outward dead and icy, with but the semblance of sight. All around him, to the very edge of the fortress of his pride beat the waves of illusion and of wrong-ness. Nauseated, he turns from them. What Heraclitus saw, the teaching of law in becoming and of play in necessity, must be seen from now on in all eternity. He raised the curtain on this greatest of all dramas. 

(Note-to-self: tbc complete translation and ordering of the fragments alongside further commentary)

### Parmenides 

While each word of Heraclitus expresses the pride and majestey of truth, truth grasped by intuitions rather than attained by the rope ladder of logic, while in sybylline rapture Heraclitus gazes but does not peer, knows but does not calculate, his contemporary Parmenides stands beside him as a counter image likewise expressing a type of truth teller but one formed of ice rather than fire, pouring cold piercing light all around. 

Parmenides starting position is from Anaximander's doctines, he had the same distrust toward a total separation of a world which only is and a world which comes to be just as Heraclitus had which led him to deny all being. Parmenides needs to answer the question "What is coming to be?" Since coming to be has a content which is lost in the process of passing away, it presupposes that positive qualities participate in the proccess of change. For coming to be, the existent as well as the non-existent are necessary, desire unites the contradictory and mutally repellent elements: the result is coming to be. When that desire is satiated, "All things pass." 

But can something which is not be a quality? What is not, is not. What is, is. That which truly is must be forever present; you cannot say of it "it was", "it will be." The existence cannot have come to be out of the nonexistent, since the nonexistent is not and cannot produce anything. Out of the existent this would produce nothing but itself. Passing away is just as impossible as coming to be, as is all change, all increase, all decrease. Everything of which you can say 'it has been' or 'it will be' is not; of the existent you can never say 'it is not'. The existent is indivisible, for where is the second power that can divide it. It is immobile for where could it move to. It is neither large nor small, not in space. There is only eternal unity. 

Thus he accomplished the immensely significant first critique of man's apparatus of knowledge, a critique as yet inadequate but doomed to bear dire consequences. By wrenching apart the senses and the capacity for abstraction, in other words by splitting up mind as though it were composed of two quite separate capacities, he demolished intellect itself, encouraging man to indulge in that wholly erroneous distinction between "spirit" and "body" which. especially since Plato, lies upon philosophy like a curse. All sense perceptions, says Parmenides, yield but illusions. And their main illusoriness lies in their pretense that the non-existent coexists with the existent, that Becoming, too, has Being.

All the manifold colorful world known to experience, all the transformations of its qualities, all the orderliness of its ups and downs, are cast aside mercilessly as mere semblance and illusion.

When one makes a judgement, as does Parmenides about the whole of the world, one caeses to be a scientist, an investigator into any of the worlds parts. One's sympathy toward phenomena atrophies; one even develops a hatred for phenomena including oneself, a hatred for being unable to get rid of the everlasting deceitfulness of sensation. Henceforward truth shall live only in the palest, most abstracted generalities, in the empty husks of the most indefinite terms, as though in a house of cobwebs. And beside such truth now sits our philosopher, likewise as bloodless as his abstractions, in the spun out fabric of his formulas. A spider at least wants blood from its victims. The Parmenidean philosopher hates most of all the blood of his victims, the blood of the empirical reality which was sacrificed and shed by him.

Parmenides' conclusion rests on the assumption that we have an organ of knowledge which reaches into the essence of things and is independent of experience. The content of our thinking is not present in sense perception but is an additive from somewhere else, from an extra-sensory world to which we have direct access by means of our thinking. The logical truth of the pair of opposites being and nonbeing is completely empty, if the object of which it is a reflection cannot be given, i.e., the sense perception from which this antithesis was abstracted. Without such a derivation from perception, it is no more than a playing with ideas, which in fact yields no knowledge. For the mere logical criterion of truth, as Kant teaches it, the correspondence of knowledge with the universal and formal laws of understanding and reason, is to be sure, the negative condition of all truth. But further than this, logic cannot go, and the error as to content rather than form cannot be detected by using any logical touchstone whatever. As soon as we seek the content of the logical truth of the paired propositions "What is, is; what is not, is not," we cannot indeed find any reality whatever which is construceted strictly in acordance with those propositions. Words are but symbols for the relations of things to one another and to us; nowhere do they touch upon the absolute truth. 

The infinite is used as the catalyst of reality; in its presence reality dissolves. Achilles cannot catch up with the tortoise which has a small start over him, for in order to reach the starting point of the tortoise he must have traversed innumerable infinitely many spaces - the gold coin for which we can never receieve change. Parmenides and Zeno (Kant versus Hölderlin, science versus beauty), hold fast to the truth and universal validity of the concepts and discard the perceivable world as the antithesis to all true and universally valid concepts, as the objectification of illogic and contradiction. The starting point of all their proof is the wholly unprovable, improbable assumption that with our capacity to form concepts we possess the decisive and highest criterion as to being and nonbeing, i.e., as to objective reality and its antithesis. Instead of being corrected and tested against reality (considering that they are in fact derived from it) the concepts, on the contrary, are supposed to measure and direct reality and, in case reality contradicts logic, to condemn the former. In order to impose upon the concepts this capacity for judging reality, Parmenides had to ascribe to them the being which was for him the only true being. Thinking and that single uncreated perfect globe of existentiality were not to be comprehended as two different types of being, since of course there could be no dichotomy in being. Thus an incredibly bold notion became necessary, the notion of the identity of thinking and being. No form of perception, no symbol, no allegory could help here; the notion was utterly beyond conceiving, but it was necessary. In its very lack of any and all possibility for being translated into sensation, it celebrated the highest triumph over the world and the claims of the senses. Thinking and that bulbous-spherical being, wholly dead-inert and rigid-immobile must, according to Parmenides' imperative, coincide and be utterly the same thing. What a shock to human imagination! But let their identity contradict sensation! Just that fact guarantees better than anything else that this was a conception not derived from the senses.

The introductory section of Parmenides' philosophical poem concludes with the Goddess telling him "it is needful that you learn all things, whether the untrembling heart of well rounded truth or the opinions of mortals in which is no true belief". It is no suprise then that the road Parmenides takes is outside the tread of men, the implication that truth, as disctinct from mere human seeming, is divine. We may be reminded of Heraclitus. 

The road of 'is not' may not be taken, because it is impossible to know that which is not, the same is for thinking and being, it is impossible to tread the way of non-being because there is nothing there to know or express; to think is to think something - verbs of cognition take a direct object; to think nothing would be to not think. Thinking is the apprehension of being, of something rather than nothing. Conversely, being is limited to that which can be thought, intelligibility is the bery meaning of being. Thinking is solely the apprehension of being and being is wholly and solely that which is given to thought. This should not be taken to imply an idealism in any subjectivist sense, as though thought were prior to being and being posterior to thought - being and thought apart from one another make no sense here. 

### Anaxagoras 

Against Parmenidean separation of senses and concepts, and the identity of thinking and being Anaxagoras poses some objections. In the first place, if thinking in concepts on the part of reason is real, then the many and motion must partake in reality also, for reasoned thinking is mobile. In the second place, if only fraud and semblance emanate from the senses, and if in truth there is only the real identity of thinking and being, what then are the senses themselves? Evidently a part of semblance, since they do not coincide with thinking, but to whom do they dissemble? How, being unreal, can they deceieve? Non-being cannot practice deceit. In this supposition there is no room for transformation in a narrow sense i.e., coming to be. What we have now is a multiplicity which has true being; a;; the properties have true being, as has motion. About each and every moment of the world one would have to say: all true essences contained in the world are existent simultaneously, unchanged, undiminished, without increase, without decrease. If the world looks different a millenia apart this is not an illusion but rather the consequence of everlasting motion. True being is moved sometimes this way sometimes that way together asunder upwardly downward withinly all directions. 

Now the problem lies as such, the problem of transferring the doctrine of the uncreated and imperishable being to the world as it is here and now, without having to recourse to the theory of semblance with its deceit practised upon us by the senses. Matter itself must contain true being. Anaxagoras now asserts that the like can never produce the unlike and that change can never be explained out of a single existent. Now it is said that there are countless substances, but never more, never fewer, never new ones, only motion turns them around into new patterns and motion is truth. If there are many substances and these move what is it that moves them? Where does motion come from? Those wholly isolated, totally different, and forever unchanging substances were, after all, not thought of as absolutely different, but rather they were felt to have a completely like substratum, a fragment of space-filling matter, in addition to their specific, wholly unique property. All change depended not on the differences between substances but on their similarity insofar as they all partake of matter. There is a logical error here inherent in Anaxagoras' presuppositions. For that which is truly existent in itself would have to be a wholly absolute unit, allowing no further assumptions as to its cause. But all the Anaxagorian substances have after all something which conditions them, namely a material substratum whose existence they posit.

Anaxagoras asserts that infinitely many substances occur, without increase, unchanged in all eternity. Plurality, motion, infinity - all chased off by Parmenides with his proposition about being return from exile to snipe at his opponents. If the opponents wish to interpose objections such as the succession of thinking, then Parmenides may answer as Kant did: "I can say to be sure that my ideas follow upon one another, but all that means is that I am conscious of them in terms of succession in time, i.e., according to the form of the inward sense. But this does not make time a thing in itself, nor a condition objectively adhering to things." What has to be distignuished is pure thinking and our consciousness of this thinking. The latter comes translated by thinking into the forms of semblance, i.e., into succession, multiplicity and motion. 

To Anaxagoras, ideas moved of themselves, they did not have any moving cause outside of them, hence there is something that carries in itself the origin and beginning of motion, ideas move not only itself but something different from itself, it moves the body, an effect on the part of ideas upon matter extended in space. He now has a regulative scheme of motion in the world which he thinks of as a movement of the true isolated essences by means of the faculty of ideas, or else as motion by the means of something already moved. In short, Anaxagoras could now assume a first moment of motion in primeval time, as the germination point of all so-called "becoming," i.e., of all change, i.e., of all displacement and shifting of the eternal substances and their particles. Even though spirit itself is eternal, it is nonetheless not compelled to torture itself for aeons with the pushing and manipulating of little kernels of matter. In any case there was a time and a condition of matter - regardless whether of long or short duration - when nous had not yet influenced it, when matter was still inert. This is the period of Anaxagorian chaos.

Observation of the productive processes of nature, rather than consideration of any former philosophical system, gave Anaxagoras the doctrine that everything originates from everything. If everything can come-to-be from everything, solid from liquid, hard from soft, black from white, flesh from bread, then everything must be contained in everything as well. Now how is it possible that one substance preponderates and fills a thing with more of its mass than do other substances? Experience shows that such preponderance is produced gradually by motion that it is the result of a process commonly called coming-to-be. The fact, on the other hand, that everything is contained in everything, is not the result of such a process but on the contrary is the presupposition of all coming-to-be and all being-moved. But it would be a great error to equate the primal pell-mell of all such points (such "seeds of things") with the single primal substance of Anaximander. For the latter, called the "indefinite," is an absolutely single and unique mass, the former an aggregate of substances.

Spirit, which alone has motion in itself, is the sole possessor of autonomy in the world. It demonstrates this by moving the substance-kernels about. But where does it move them? Or is motion without direction, without ascertainable course thinkable? Does spirit act as randomly in its impulses as its timing is random? In other words, does accident, which is to say the blindest caprice, rule within motion? It is at this borderline that we step into the holy of holies of Anaxagoras' field of ideas. How in other words could a chaos become a cosmos? This can only be the consequence of motion but it must be a definite and a wisely instituted motion. Such a motion is the means employed by the nous; its end would be the complete separating out of the likes, an end which is still unattained, since the disorder and state of mixture at the beginning was of in· finite magnitude. The end can only be striven toward in an enormously long process; it cannot be created aU at once by a mythological magic wand. Is it not a sublime thought, to derive the magnificence of the cosmos and the marvellous arrangements of the stellar orbits wholly from a single. simple, purely mechanical movement, from a mathematical figure in motion, as it were! It seems to me that one might say at this point, without presumption, "Give me materiality and I shall build a world from it!"

Having once started with its motion, and thus having set itself a goal, it would be .•." To complete this sentence is difficult. Heraclitus did; he said "a game." The Spirit of Anaxagoras is a creative artist. It is, in fact, the most tremendous mechanical and architectural genius, creating with the simplest means the most impressive forms and orbits, creating a movable architectonic, as it were, but ever from the irrational free random choosing that lies in the artist's depths. Coming to be is not a moral but an aesthetic phenomenon. Anaxagoras treats physical things with the reverance and awe which we stand before the antique temple. The greatest Anaxagorian of them all was Pericles, the mightiest and worthiest man on earth. As to him Plato testifies that only the philosophy of Anaxagoras gave his genius its sublime flight. When he stood before his people as public orator, in the beautiful rigidity and motionlessness of a marble Olympian and began to speak, calmly, wrapped in his mantle, its draperies unmoved, his countenance without change of expression, without smile, his strong voice powerfully even-when, totally different from Demosthenes, he spoke in his "Periclean" manner, thundering, flashing, destroying, re- deeming-then he represented the very image of the Anaxagorian cosmos, the image of nous itself that has built for itself a most beautiful and worthy mansion. Pericles represented the visible human realization of the constructive, moving, distinguishing, ordering, reviewing, planning, artistically creative, self-determining power of the spirit.