---
subtitle:
date: 2023-09-26
tags: Ancient-Greece Eugenics 
---

# Selective Breeding and the Birth of Philosophy

## Breeding Foundation of All Law

Who wins in the sexual market as it is formed in a particular society, who gets to breed, is closely related, nearly identical to the question of how the next generation in that society is to be constituted. The question of the sexual and breeding laws is therefore identical to the question of regime, constitution, or foundation as such. 

Modern liberalism and capitalism, modern universal ethics or morality, are latecomers and piggyback on the fundamental and centuries-long work done by the manorial system and Christianity in reshaping and perhaps rebreeding European man—for there is strong evidence that many of the behaviors described, such as altruism toward strangers, are by now hereditary in certain populations. The culture of civility on which liberal, private society is built is inconceivable without this preparatory work done by Christianity, and which was carried out most effectively at the root, determining who married who, and therefore what kind of children were to be born. Thus it is arguably precisely through its marriage and breeding laws that Christianity shaped the modern world. For Nietzsche, Christianity laid the groundwork for the calamity of modern liberalism, modern democracy, and modern socialism, which threatened to destroy, maybe permanently, not only the possibility of philosophy, but of life in the full sense of the word.

Throughout the works of Xenophon the preoccupation with marriage, matchmaking, and breeding is very marked: for example, at the beginning of his short treatise on hunting with dogs, he tells a story about how the centaur Chiron, a brother of Zeus and a demon of the wild, taught hunting and other skills to heroes and demigods, and arranged for them fortuitous marriages—the marriages from which issued the noble bloodlines of the Greeks. The text itself is of course much concerned with the breeding, grooming and training of dogs. In his Economicus, which is literally “the art of household management,” the principal concern seems to be the estate holder’s relationship with his wife, including their meeting and courtship. Xenophon begins the Constitution of the Spartans with the laws regarding the begetting of children—in quite technical, even biological detail—and the laws of marriage even only after that. The best regime, the Republic, is a eugenic state, crafted exclusively with a view to eugenics, and its downfall is because of dysgenic unions. 

From the classical point of view, once one accepts the necessity of this question of the centrality of human breeding, for example as the founder of a political state, or the founder of a religion, or as a lawgiver, it becomes intimately tied with the question of human superiority. For it is of greatest importance which qualities a wife also selects for in husband, what types of men are rewarded and given chance to have a posterity. It concerns the next generation of citizens or subjects. How they are to be raised, provided for, educated, what kinds of men and women they are to become. But most importantly, who is to be born.

The ancient Greeks embody more than any other nation in history the profound connection between attention to breeding laws or practices on one hand and the development, even exaggeration, of human inequality on the other. Their culture is the subject of so much interest now, and, rightly or wrongly, they are recognized as the foundation of Western civilization. Nietzsche understood, however, that a modern would shudder if he were to perceive the real root of Greek civilization. We don’t appreciate the immense cruelty and suffering that was necessary to create the serene, light-filled culture that gave birth to our artistic, literary, and philosophical traditions. The alien harshness that was a precondition for Greek culture was noted by, among many, the historian Jakob Burckhardt; consider this passage about the splendor of the Ionian aristocracy:

- An important difference between that age and our own consists in their having (somewhat as the French still do) more respect for quality than for size of population. Besides, when full democracy emerged, it consisted in reality of an aristocratic minority as opposed to the metics and the slaves. It is only in modern times that men earn as much money as possible to support the maximum number of children, no matter what the privation and drudgery involved and however the quality of the population may suffer in the process; we have already spoken of the means, ruthless as they were, that the Greeks adopted to limit numbers. In any case, this society was a splendid one to contemplate; the poet of the Homeric hymn to Apollo can say of the Ionians as they appeared at the festival of Delos: ‘He who meets them all assembled would say that they are immortal and ageless, he would see how graceful they all are and would rejoice in his heart when he saw the men, and the women finely clad, and the swift ships and their many riches.’ Then follows special praise for the maidens of Delos and their song, which set the seal of perfection on this magnificent existence.

This magnificent existence depended on ruthless methods of population control and pruning. Simply put, behind this image of human flourishing lie generations of attention to citizen quality rather than quantity, which is to say, to eugenics, with all its cruelty, an orientation that never left the Greek world. Behind this innocent-sounding formula lie all manner of exclusionary, forceful measures: the removal from the city rolls of citizens who don’t live up to the moral, physical, and intellectual standards befitting a member of the polis; the ruthless subsuming of village life to city life; eugenics, infanticide, sexual apartheid, “classism,” “racism”; the intense physical and moral discipline and rigor entailing mercilessness towards both others and oneself. Finally, and most chilling for a modern audience, force and violence: slavery on one hand, and training for war on the other, as the absolute prerequisites of this type of society and this type of man.

Friedrich Nietzsche, speaking of the different goals of different peoples, states of the Greeks: 

- “You shall always be the first and excel all others: your jealous soul shall love no one, unless it be the friend”—that made the soul of the Greek quiver: thus he walked the path of his greatness. 

The pursuit of excellence, the desire to be proven the best compared to all other men, is the foundation of all of Greek culture. Victory in the contest or agon is taken to be the demonstration of such excellence and superiority. The clearest and most manifest exhibition of this superiority was in physical contest, in victory in physical contest, and in the exhibition of bodily beauty:

- The aim was now to develop the body to the highest perfection of beauty, a purpose for which each individual had to submit to a methodical discipline just as severe as training in the arts, denying himself any personal manifestations of ‘genius’.

The central institution of the polis was the gymnasium—the gymnasium was the center of Greek social life in the cities. The original meaning of virtue or arête is precisely this type of excellence in which superiority over others is manifested in various struggles, whether athletic or intellectual, but both having their origins in the military training of the citizen. The corollary to all of this is that the Greek state or polis, which today we are likely to imagine as the origin of our democracy, was in fact nothing more or less than a breeding project for superior specimens. Such, again, was how Critias saw the Spartan constitution. And Plato’s Republic, as we will see, is argued by Nietzsche, and not only by Nietzsche, to be the “best regime” or idealization of the Greek city with everything non-essential removed, so that it is shown, in its final manifestation in speech, to be a project for the breeding and production of genius. Greek culture is thus “universal” in the sense that it is the first culture which, with awareness of nature, that is, of biology, undertook to cultivate and breed itself into a higher form.

Behind the Greek obsession with citizen quality, with excellence, with personal and generational biological improvement, lies the converse, a depreciation of the life of the slave, or, more generally, of the type of man who lives only to live, who is willing to survive at any cost, or who is willing to accept subservience to avoid death. To speak of superior and inferior ways of life is necessarily to deny that every form of life has dignity or meaning. But, in particular, the net effect is to deny that mere life has any worth. If one can speak of one type of life being superior and another being inferior, it’s only a few steps to this conclusion. For this reason Nietzsche begins his early essay on the Greek state by pointing out that the Greeks would have rejected as vile lies and cant our modern ideas of the dignity of human life and the dignity of labor. Labor, as the mere maintenance or preservation of mere life, has no value in and of itself, because mere life has no value.[greek-state]

The precondition for the emergence of philosophy is widely acknowledged to be the idea of nature, which, up to that time, was unknown entirely outside the Greek world, and, long thereafter, was the preserve only of the Roman and Hellenistic world, that is, of the world that inherited it from the Greeks. The emergence of the idea of nature and of philosophy itself come from an awareness of biology and breeding. 

The question of aristocracy is central because it is from a certain kind of aristocracy that the idea of nature uniquely emerges, and therefore that the possibility of philosophy can uniquely emerge. The historical origins of the first aristocracies and the meaning of aristocracy as such has been my driving concern throughout this essay: the argument I make here is that the precondition for philosophy is the decay of a certain type of aristocracy. For, as with Nietzsche, the argument is made that both philosophy and tyranny develop in late or declining aristocracies, as a kind of refinement, abstraction, or radicalization of the aristocratic way of life and of the principle that underlies aristocratic life and the aristocratic worldview. This is the principle of blood or breeding which, intellectualized and abstracted, is nothing other than the idea of nature. Indeed this is the origin of the idea of nature, without which it could have never dawned on mankind.

When the idea of nature first emerged, it did so in opposition to convention or “custom.” Cows graze, wolves hunt by nature; but different tribes of men deal differently with the dead — cremation, burial, etc. — by custom or convention. It is a distinction roughly similar to our own “nature versus culture” or “nature versus nurture” or “nature versus social construct.” The question of what was “by nature” or “by convention” animated much of Greek intellectual life, and had important political meaning, for example, with the aristocratic party generally favoring the side of nature, and the democratic generally favoring the side of convention. Precisely the slaves favor this convention because they are too weak and disgusting to compete. 

Based both on George Frazer’s Golden Bough and on various other observations drawn from many sources, both ancient and modern, I draw the conclusion that primitive tribal life can be characterized as a fundamental democracy or more accurately a gyno-gerontocratic democracy, a fundamental democracy that is administered by elders and councils of elders; that it is ruled by ancestral custom or nomos, in an absolute and “totalitarian” way, ruled by tribal conventions, laws, and myths that regulate almost every aspect of life, allow no individual distinction, and ruthlessly quash any form of intellectual questioning or dissent. It is in a fundamental sense ruthlessly egalitarian, authoritarian and collectivist, even when there might be functional social distinctions. This kind of “default” mode of humanity, rule by ancestral custom or by convention, homogenizes all life and all thought. How could for the idea of nature to emerge out of such life?

Only through external conquest could a principle different from, and antithetical to, the totalitarian, homogenous, and egalitarian primal nomos have emerged in some society. In particular, an act of conquest where the conquering group continued to exist apart from the conquered long thereafter, and was freed both from the necessity to care for mere life, as well as afforded the possibility of a cosmopolitan, outward-looking worldview. The Greeks, with their hungry curiosity for other peoples, for their histories, ways, excellences and foibles—an absolute prerequisite for the discovery of nature, which abhors petty parochialism—possessed the outlook of a “conquering people.” It is within the way of life, regime, or intellectual outlook of certain aristocracies that we begin to see the idea of nature in a rudimentary form. In particular the knowledge of biological breeding, as it was available in general to pastoral peoples or aristocracies with a pastoral origin in their remote history, is the likely source for the idea of nature. The observation that certain qualities, physical traits, and even behaviors are passed through the breeding of various animal stocks is the source of the realization that there exists a principle apart from tribal custom or convention, that endures through generations entirely apart from the oral transmission and social enforcement of customs, and that operates entirely apart from education or indoctrination simply.

As we will see, all of the earliest mentions of nature, and certainly all the elaborations of the idea of nature, are entirely biological, and have to do with the physical body, with biological “vitality,” and especially with blood or, again, breeding, eugenics, and heredity. It is crucial to understand the origin of the idea of nature in breeding or heredity — without this it is impossible to understand the history of Western thought, therefore history in general — and it is impossible to understand what nature still means.

The first real elaboration of the idea of nature, which exists entirely as a product of Greek aristocratic thought, is to be found in the victory odes of Pindar. Here we have the purest exposition of the outlook of the Greek aristocracy at its height, the full elaboration of its worldview, its yearnings. [paideia] As such it is an invaluable anthropological document, and in Pindar’s discussion of nature we see its first real, and, maybe to us, shocking meaning. The odes are composed to memorialize athletic victories, and it is precisely in the exaltation of the body to its heights that nature becomes manifested as a principle of biology, breeding, blood, and what Nietzsche would later call life. In the emergence of the aristocratic athlete’s body and character—the two are the same—from the dark collective murk into the enduring radiance of immortal fame, Pindar sees the principle of blood, heredity, or nature fully manifested. And he explicitly connects this with other political, social and philosophical questions that are likely to be of interest to any student of antiquity, of political life, or of the history of Western thought since Plato. Plato is full of references to Pindar, and Plato’s special “preoccupation with breeding” is likely inherited from Pindar along with the entire Greek and aristocratic conception of nature.

- Consider the beginning of Burckhardt’s chapter on the Agonal Age, from The Greeks and Greek Civilization: “The time we shall describe as the period of the agon extends from the end o f the Dorian migration almost to the end of the sixth century b.c; it might well be called the Middle Ages of Greek history. The division is arbitrary, like all divisions, but will prove useful to us; we are obliged to organize our material and select categories as best we can. This period is generally characterized first by the alternating domination of the polis by aristocracy and tyranny; secondly, along with the firm belief in breeding, by the peculiar ideal of kalokagathia, the unity of nobility, wealth and excellence as the distinguishing mark of the Greeks, heralded by Pindar. The nobility reigned everywhere, even in the states that were not transformed by the Dorian migration. The right of the overlords was founded on superior blood, greater landed wealth, skill in arms, and knowledge of the sacrifices and the laws. The banausic, that is tilling the soil, crafts, shopkeeping, commerce and the like, was despised. The only occupation fit for a nobleman was the practice of arms or work for the games or the state, not work concerned with the necessities of life. Masses yearning to be free were encouraged to emigrate to the colonies where they became aristocrats in their turn. This nobility was neither a scattered rural squirearchy (Junkertum) nor a military caste (Rittertum); it was more nearly comparable to the patriarchate in mediaeval cities, particularly the Italian - a social group living together in the city and taking an energetic part in its administration, while at the same time constituting its society; the ethos of the agon would have sufficed to unite such a group even in the absence of other factors.”

Christianity, for its own purposes, adopted much of the Platonic dogma but in doing so entirely forgot about, or entirely obscured, the original meaning of nature that was still lurking in the background of Platonic teachings so long as they were animated by a living school. Thereafter Christianity, having taken spiritual hold of Europe, but having no knowledge of the secret foundational art—the knowledge of breeding and its significance for marriage law—misbred man through the promotion of dysgenic unions, with the result being the modern “misbegotten” human that is so much the object of Nietzsche’s, and not only Nietzsche’s, scorn, the modern man, the man of democracy, socialism, feminism, the Last Man. The calamity that Nietzsche saw in this event was a universal and homogenous reestablishment of the ancient commune, the original totalitarian democracy where philosophy and genius would be made impossible, and indeed nature and life would be permanently botched.

The conclusion of the book deals precisely with this matter, the possibility of the study of human nature in the social sciences, the inevitability of the reform of the social sciences as a result of new findings in the fields of genetics, and the likely political and social consequences of this development. Black Africans, in particular, are so divergent from the rest of humanity that they exceed the threshold commonly used in other species to draw sub-species boundaries. A revelation as shocking as it is by now indisputable. Sforza’s 1994 magnum opus, The History and Geography of Human Genes, will likely prove to be a watershed work. Together with the discovery of the genetic correlation of behavior, this represents the most thorough and unanswerable vindication of the idea of nature produced by modern science.
(Note-to-self: Canon fire at the masses; how fast things turn; the j question)

## A Brief on Philosophy and Tyranny 

The ancient prejudice was that philosophy was somehow associated with tyranny as such — perhaps in the sense that tyrants so often seemed to have received part of their education from philosophers. Or perhaps in the sense that both seemed so free, dangerously free, of conventional moral notions and conventional piety — free to the point of criminality. This is part of what made philosophers highly suspect figures at least when they first appeared. The quotation from Aeschines’ speech Against Timarchus, delivered before a large audience, in which he casually refers to how “you put to death Socrates the sophist, fellow citizens, because he was shown to have been the teacher of Critias, one of the Thirty Tyrants who put down the democracy,” is very revealing of what the ancient prejudice was.

The connection between philosophy and tyranny at bottom has to do with the necessities of educating the first philosophers. Such an education, in an era in which philosophy does not exist established as a tradition, that is, when philosophy is in its beginnings, necessarily risks the production instead of a tyrant — it depends on encouraging a political orientation that is tyrannical from the point of view of the polis; and it trains certain skills and abilities that are “tyrannical.”

It is in the work of Nietzsche that we find the most explicit and profound reflections on how philosophy and tyranny are related at their very roots, and on how the philosopher and the tyrant are in fact the same “type.” According to Nietzsche the decline of an aristocratic regime — the decline in particular of the Greek polis — leads to the emergence both of tyranny and of philosophy. An era that gives birth to philosophy is necessarily one where the danger of tyranny is ever-present. This Nietzschean idea of the birth of philosophy and tyranny, as twins, out of the spirit of aristocracy is quite strange. In what sense can it be said that “aristocracy” or an aristocratic regime is the precondition for philosophy? And what precisely is the relationship of these to tyranny? A third striking question follows upon these: since both Nietzsche and Strauss, as well as the tradition of political philosophy, agree that philosophy stands or falls by the discovery of the idea of nature and therefore that the discovery of nature is the proximate precondition for the emergence of political philosophy—in what way then does nature emerge as an idea or as a standard out of the aristocratic regime? What, in the end, is the meaning of “nature,” of “human nature,” at the very beginnings of political philosophy?

This thesis is an attempt to show that the aristocratic regime, and aristocratic morality, is the origin of the idea of nature; that, at the point at which a historical aristocracy starts to decline, its defenders, in abstracting and radicalizing the case for aristocracy in the face of its critics, come upon the teaching of nature and the standard of nature in politics. It is precisely this teaching of nature, so corrosive of all convention and all morality, that is politically explosive, and that explains the deep connection between philosophy—the criminal study of nature outside the city and outside the myths and pieties of the regime—and tyranny—the criminal and feral regime of rule outside and above all law and all convention.

It is argued and concluded that the enigmatic idea of nature—the necessary precondition, as we are to see, for both philosophy and for tyranny—emerges uniquely out of the way of life and morality of a certain type of aristocracy. The second part of the thesis, on Pindar and on Plato, is an attempt to show, from Greek literature and from philosophy (in particular from the Socratic school) how the standard of nature was elaborated as a defense for the aristocratic regime and how, when radicalized, it explains the connection between the philosopher and the tyrant as types, between the philosophical and tyrannical orientations toward the city.

## Brief Phenomenology of the Prephilosophical Political life

The aim is to show how the idea of nature—and therefore the precondition for philosophy—emerges out of aristocratic life or an aristocratic ethos. The claims I try to elaborate here are the following: a) that the Greek world is, from as early as we can tell, stratified into a conquering and a conquered people, an aristocratic element and a “banausic” or serf-like element. And that the conquering or aristocratic caste already contains, from the beginning, certain peculiar institutions that I will later show to bear directly on the problem of tyranny and philosophy—in particular the institution of an independent warrior class composed of youths; b) that these two features of Greek life, namely the top-down imposition of order by a conquering elite and the separate and independent status of the warrior class, is likely what allows for a principle different from the fundamental democracy or fundamental collectivism to emerge, albeit one still understood “prephilosophically,” i.e., through the prism of myth; c) that this principle consists, not in the preservation of a people or a collective, but in the struggle for individual superiority, understood as a matter of the supremacy of one’s “blood,” with direct analogy to the animal world, and which is manifested through physical supremacy, vitality, and battle prowess, and in the consequent acquisition of an “undying fame.”

To understand the problem of natural right one must start, not from the “scientific” understanding of natural things, but from their natural understanding, i.e., from the way in which they present themselves in political life, in action, when they are our business, when we have to make a decision...the first philosopher was the first man who discovered nature. The whole history of philosophy is nothing but the record of the ever repeated attempts to grasp fully what was implied in that crucial discovery which was made by some Greek twenty-six hundred years ago or before. To understand that discovery in however provisional a manner, one must return from the idea of nature to its prephilosophic equivalent.

Nietzsche’s rejection of a rational morality is based on his rejection of a utilitarian morality; it is precisely the binding of man to arbitrary, even absurd laws, to laws which serve no particular benefit, that is the character of morality. Religion, premodern polytheism then, cannot emerge out of a utilitarian morality as in the model of Hume. Peoples themselves are the result of the founding acts of creative prophets; much as in Rousseau, Nietzsche believes such prophets or founders—legislators in the highest sense—are the origin therefore of mores and conventions by which peoples live. In this task the founder uses religion, but the religious experience of such founders, and by extension religious experience in general, is therefore not reducible to calculation of benefit or of self-interest. And even in cases where a primitive tribal morality emerges out of the necessities of daily life, it’s not possible to reduce this only to the satisfaction of rational material desires or needs because man is often more motivated instead by pride, by the need for distinction, by the need for superiority over neighbors, by the need to subsume individual to group, and often to do so for entirely irrational reasons that merely reaffirm morality for the sake of morality.

Prior to the discovery of nature “no fundamental distinction was made between customs which are always and everywhere the same and customs or ways which differ from tribe to tribe.” The first corollary of this is that it is not just a kind of “law” or “custom” or “convention” that is in question here, but something far more fundamental and all-encompassing. It has been noted by others that it is a mistranslation and therefore gross misunderstanding to see nomos simply as “law,” as is often done. This mistranslation allows for inappropriate comparisons between what is meant by “rule of law” in classical times and in modern times. Nomos is a word that encompasses far more than “law” and indeed far more than “convention,” a word with vaguely contractarian overtones, mean to us today. Carl Schmitt makes the point that:

- As long as the Greek word nomos in the often-cited passages from Heraclitus and Pindar is transformed from a spatially concrete, constitutive act of order and orientation—from the ordo ordinans into a mere enactment of acts in line with an ought and, consistent with the manner of thinking in the positivistic legal system, translated with the word law—all disputes about interpretation are hopeless and all philological acumen fruitless. Matters are further complicated by the fact that most philological interpreters obviously have no sense of how totally the word law was functionalized by late 19th century jurists into the positivistic legal system of the modern state apparatus, until legality had become merely a weapon used at any given time by those legislating against the part excluded from legislation. In reality the words of Heraclitus and Pindar mean only that all subsequent regulations of a written or unwritten kind derive their power from the inner measure of an original, constitutive act of spatial ordering. This original act is nomos. All subsequent developments are either results of and expansions of this act or else redistributions (anadasmoi)—either a continuation on the same basis or a disintegration of and departure from the constitutive act of the spatial order established by land-appropriation, the founding of cities, or colonization.

Nomos is an all-encompassing primordial act of foundation. It is worth considering the historian Burckhardt’s own congruent words on the dignity and power of the ancient meaning of nomos as opposed to most modern usages of “law,” “convention” and even “constitution”:

- There was also another sense and another form in which the polis regarded itself as an ideal whole, and that is in its nomos, a word used to embrace the laws and with them the constitution. Nomos is the higher objective power, supreme over all individual existence or will, not satisfied merely to protect a citizen in return for taxes and military service, as in modern times, but aspiring to be the very soul of the whole polis. Law and the constitution are hymned in the most sublime phrases as the invention and gift of the gods, as the city’s personality, as the guardians and preservers of all virtue. They are the “rulers of the cities,” and Demaratus the Spartan seeks to explain to Xerxes that his people fear King Law (despotes nomos) more than the Persians fear their Great King. The officials in particular are, as Plato puts it, to be the slaves of the law. The lawgiver therefore appeared as a superhuman being, and the glory of Lycurgus, Solon, Zaleucus and Charondas sheds a reflected light on much later men, so that for instance, as late as about 400 BC the Syracusan law refomer Diocles received heroic honors and even a temple after his death. 

Law or nomos retained this character for the city even to the end of the Classical period, and was understood to have an all-pervading power to determine daily life and thought; and even during the convulsions of the Peloponnesian War, with its murderous civil strife between factions, it was understood—at least for the purposes of lip service—that nomos as an original constitutive act was something that lay quite outside the self-interest of parties, let alone that of the individual — a permanent “convention” constitutive of the citizen as such, and therefore outside the vagaries of day-to-day political (let alone economic) interests:

- Above all, nomos must not pander to the transitory interests and caprices of the individual or of those who happen to be in the majority. It was strongly felt, at least in theory, that old laws should be retained; indeed, customs and manners which were even older than laws, and had perhaps been in force from the very foundation of the city, were recognized as having a vigor of which the laws were only the outward expression. And even inadequate laws, as long as they were strictly observed, seemed a better guarantee of stability than change would be. Alcibiades said as much in the conclusion of his great speech in favor of the expedition to Sicily. In certain states boys had to learn the laws by heart, set to a tune or cadence, not just to fix them in the memory but to ensure that they became unalterable. (The Greek word nomos has the double meaning of law and melody.)

The power of nomos for the prephilosophical mind, its unified and undisputed political and religious power, is vouchsafed by its ancestral origin. As Burckhardt hints already, nomos is supreme because it is ancestral; and, as Strauss adds, it is “our own” because it belongs to “our ancestors.” That is, consequent upon the totality of custom is the identification of the way or custom of one’s own tribe with the good, and from this follows the identification of the ancestral with the good and of what is one’s own with the good:

- "Our” way is the right way because it is both old and “our own,” or because it is both “home- bred and prescriptive.” Just as “old and one’s own” was originally identical with right or good, so “new and strange” originally stood for bad. The notion connection “old” and “one’s own” is “ancestral.” Prephilosophic life is characterized by the primeval identification of the good with the ancestral.

- No human being is so hide-bound by custom and tradition as your democratic savage; in no state of society consequently is progress so slow and difficult. The old notion that the savage is the freest of mankind is the reverse of the truth. He is a slave, not indeed to a visible master, but to the past, to the spirits of his dead forefathers, who haunt his steps from birth to death, and rule him with a rod of iron. What they did is the pattern of right, the unwritten law to which he yields a blind unquestioning obedience. The least possible scope is thus afforded to superior talent to change old customs for the better. The ablest man is dragged down by the weakest and dullest, who necessarily sets the standard, since he cannot rise, while the other can fall. The surface of such a society presents a uniform dead level, so far as it is humanly possible to reduce the natural inequalities, the immeasurable real differences of inborn capacity and temper, to a false superficial appearance of equality. From this low and stagnant condition of affairs, which demagogues and dreamers in later times have lauded as the ideal state, the Golden Age, of humanity, everything that helps to raise society by opening a career to talent and proportioning the degrees of authority to men’s natural abilities, deserves to be welcomed by all who have the real good of their fellows at heart.

The fundamental democracy of the primitive system becomes very clear in this passage. One is reminded of course of Nietzsche’s rather contemptuous remark that the earliest form of social organization, the most primitive form, is the democratic and socialist commune. The character of this original democracy is a despotism more absolute than what we can imagine under any modern state: “For after all there is more liberty in the best sense—liberty to think our own thoughts and to fashion our own destinies—under the most absolute despotism, the most grinding tyranny, than under the apparent freedom of savage life, where the individual’s lot is cast from the cradle to the grave in the iron mould of hereditary custom.”

It is precisely these “counter-virtues” so to speak, of deceitfulness, knavery, wiliness that are most needful in a condition where tradition and custom weigh down heavily on the human mind; indeed, the mind itself is only liberated through such “immorality”:

- The pitfalls which beset the path of the professional sorcerer are many, and as a rule only the man of coolest head and sharpest wit will be able to steer his way through them safely. For it must always be remembered that every single profession and claim put forward by the magician as such is false; not one of them can be maintained without deception, conscious or unconscious. Accordingly the sorcerer who sincerely believes in his own extravagant pretensions is in far greater peril and is much more likely to be cut short in his career than the deliberate impostor. The honest wizard always expects that his charms and incantations will produce their supposed effect; and when they fail, not only really, as they always do, but conspicuously and disastrously, as they often do, he is taken aback: he is not, like his knavish colleague, ready with a plausible excuse to account for the failure, and before he can find one he may be knocked on the head by his disappointed and angry employers.

The issue at hand is the manipulation of custom and tradition by one man for the purposes of energetic and intelligent rule. The necessity of the development of kingship (as opposed to rule by divine law) for the emergence of “liberty in the best sense,” that is, liberty to think one’s own thoughts, and the liberty to pursue disinterested knowledge. These are but end-products of a process through which the tyranny of ancestral nomos is overturned by an energetic, deceitful man. The necessity of deceit, usurpation of convention, and finally of the conquest of neighbors—these are all preconditions for the development of civilization and for the development of science.

- The general result is that at this stage of social evolution the supreme power tends to fall into the hands of men of the keenest intelligence and the most unscrupulous character.... Once these elevating influences [of the magician/man of intelligence] have begun to operate—and they cannot be for ever suppressed—the progress of civilisation becomes comparatively rapid. The rise of one man to supreme power enables him to carry through changes in a single lifetime which previously many generations might not have sufficed to effect...Even the whims and caprices of a tyrant may be of service in breaking the chain of custom which lies so heavy on the savage. And as soon as the tribe ceases to be swayed by the timid and divided counsels of the elders, and yields to the direction of a single strong and resolute mind, it becomes formidable to its neighbours and enters on a career of aggrandisement, which at an early stage of history is often highly favourable to social, industrial, and intellectual progress. For extending its sway, partly by force of arms, partly by the voluntary submission of weaker tribes, the community soon acquires wealth and slaves, both of which, by relieving some classes from the perpetual struggle for a bare subsistence, afford them an opportunity of devoting themselves to that disinterested pursuit of knowledge which is the noblest and most powerful instrument to ameliorate the lot of man.

The opponent of intelligence is the rule of the elders, the institution through which the rule of custom, the rule of the ancestral, is made concrete. The manipulation of natural powers, in particular the belief that the chief may control the vital powers of regeneration and rebirth, having of course to do with crops and the condition of livestock, begins slowly to trump the absolute rule of Custom or nomos. In a humorous analogy or prefiguration of the power of the philosopher — a humorous analogy that we should certainly not take too far — the sorcerer gains power over the tribe and manages to escape the shackles of convention by convincing his fellow men that he understands and can control “the things in heaven and under the earth.” The religious function of the king, or the unity of priestly and kingly offices, which one would maybe otherwise casually assume to come from the very earliest stages of superstition, are in fact relatively “late” developments of relatively civilized and complex societies. Several stages of development are necessary between the primitive “rule by divine law” or “absolute authority of the ancestral” and the later institution of dual priestly-kingly rule.

It must be concluded then that primitive society is a kind of totalitarian democracy, the rule of custom is absolute and levels all, and “kingship” is originally in fact more of a ceremonial or sacrificial function. Philosophy can only be born once the concept of nature appears. But it appears that the concept of nature itself can only appear after the rather late institutions of sacral and divine kingship exist, indeed after several other conditions are satisfied; and that, indeed, nature — the “source” simultaneously of both philosophy and tyranny, really appears not as a rational concept, or by rational analogy to abstractions, but rather as a manifestation or, one could go so far as to say, a revelation. Its appearance, it must be emphasized, is late, it is rare, and only follows the emergence of a certain kind of early kingship and indeed the emergence of a certain kind of aristocracy that, unlike the early sacral king, manages to free itself entirely from the absolute “rule of the ancestral.”

A principle of rule, or way of life, different from that of primitive nomos, or the “fundamental democracy” briefly described in the previous chapter, can likely only develop when a native population is conquered and subdued by a foreign elite. That this foreign, top-down imposition, most often by a pastoral population on top of a farming population, is the origin of all genuine aristocratic morality, which can for now be provisionally reduced to the dual ideas of liberty and of breeding—the latter to be taken very literally. Now, it should not be clear, how a principle could have at all developed that was different from the “absolute authority of the ancestral,” the primitive “perfect theocracy,” the early “fundamental democracy” and domination by elders — whichever formulation we should choose for the early “totalitarianism” of nomos. It is not to be seen how a principle different from this could have developed on its own. The primitive nomos is all-encompassing. The individual in the tribe has no concept outside of the traditional tales and customs handed down by which to understand the world, one’s entire perception is dominated by magic rites under the control of the community; life is a struggle for survival and the mind is dominated by frightening natural forces that have to be propitiated communally, for example, to guarantee the crops. To question tradition, or to show interest in the gods of neighboring tribes is criminal and it is treason to begin with.

The historical rarity of philosophy and of the idea of nature alone is cause enough to consider the possibility that the precondition of philosophy is something rare and special, and not a merely abstract thinking through of features common to all conventions or all tribes as such. Obviously the alienation, but also the confidence and the intellectual sophistication to question tradition in the first place, plus a certain amount of freedom, must precede the precise form of questioning. But it is not conceivable that Thales could have come upon the concept of nature, let alone publicly expounded it, in a society that was under the total and absolute rule of one ancestral custom and that lived in permanent terror of magic. The only way a principle different from this form of early democracy (or communitarianism or collectivism if one wishes) can be introduced is through conquest by a foreign tribe or elite. This is not to say that all conquest results in the development of an aristocratic ethos. But where this latter exists—where, that is, there exists not merely a ruling class, but a principle of rule and “ideal” or, more precisely, a way of life different from and not responsible to the “fundamental democracy”—it is most probably the result of a foreign imposition by conquest, in particular conquest by tribes whose social, military, and economic organization is very different from that of the conquered to begin with. It is very difficult to imagine that a true aristocracy can rise on its own out of the primitive “rule of the ancestral.”

- as soon as the tribe ceases to be swayed by the timid and divided counsels of the elders, and yields to the direction of a single strong and resolute mind, it becomes formidable to its neighbours and enters on a career of aggrandisement, which at an early stage of history is often highly favourable to social, industrial, and intellectual progress. For extending its sway, partly by force of arms, partly by the voluntary submission of weaker tribes, the community soon acquires wealth and slaves, both of which, by relieving some classes from the perpetual struggle for a bare subsistence, afford them an opportunity of devoting themselves to that disinterested pursuit of knowledge which is the noblest and most powerful instrument to ameliorate the lot of man.

It is clear that the imposition of an aristocratic caste on top of a sedentary population is a crucial prerequisite for the development of the intellect or of science. 

Two essential qualities of the aristocrats: political ability or intelligence, and military courage—could be directly translated as phronesis and andreia, the two primal qualities of the Greek aristocrat in Homer or Pindar: the ability to give good counsel in assembly, and manliness or prowess in battle. The parallel even extends to the past-times of aristocratic women—the persistence of political character, even in details, across time and cultures is truly remarkable—as the Homeric ideal seems to be a woman who weaves (fine cloths, not baskets, in the Greek case) and sings beautifully; the literary image that includes both elements and therefore must have appealed most to Homer’s audience was that of Penelope. The disdain for manual labor, and in particular for farmwork, is also universal. In the Greek world one of the most emphatic statements containing such an attitude exists in the archaic drinking song occasionally called “The Song of Hybrias,”:

- My wealth is my great spear and sword And the good rawhide shield, bulwark of hide. With this I plough, with this I reap, With this I drink sweet wine from the vine, With this I have gotten the name “Lord of the serfs”. Those who have not the courage to wield a spear and sword And the good rawhide shield, bulwark of hide, All of them fall and kiss my knee, Calling me “Lord” and “Great King.”

This emphasis on martial virtue as a replacement for the drudgery of farm-work and as proof of the holder’s vitality, freedom from the responsibility for the cares of life, and of his superiority to lesser men who must eke out a paltry living from the earth is, again, fundamental and universal to the development of aristocratic morality. The mentality here consists in a lack of equality to a lower class of people, who are felt to be not merely alien ethnically, but who are seen as radically different in way of life, in particular as tied to the earth and to the preservation of mere life, to servile domesticity, in a way that the aristocrat is not. This characteristic contempt of farmwork and of mere life understood as drudgery and preservation appears also in Tacitus’ description of the early Germanic tribes; these still lived a non-agricultural, semi-nomadic life, when he says of them that: 

- Nor are they as easily persuaded to plough the earth and to wait for the year’s produce as to challenge an enemy and earn the honour of wounds. Nay, they actually think it tame and stupid to acquire by the sweat of toil what they might win by their blood...Whenever they are not fighting, they pass much of their time in the chase, and still more in idleness, giving themselves up to sleep and to feasting, the bravest and the most warlike doing nothing, and surrendering the management of the household, of the home, and of the land, to the women, the old men, and all the weakest members of the family.... The master requires from the slave a certain quantity of grain, of cattle, and of clothing, as he would from a tenant, and this is the limit of subjection. All other household functions are discharged by the wife and children.

This attitude is instantly recognizable to any reader of Homer or one who remembers the beginning of Thucydides’ Histories, where he says of the early Greeks that:

- For in early times the Hellenes and the barbarians of the coast and islands, as communication by sea became more common, were tempted to turn pirates, under the conduct of their most powerful men; the motives being to serve their own cupidity and to support the needy. They would fall upon a town unprotected by walls, and consisting of a mere collection of villages, and would plunder it; indeed, this came to be the main source of their livelihood, no disgrace being yet attached to such an achievement, but even some glory. An illustration of this is furnished by the honour with which some of the inhabitants of the continent still regard a successful marauder, and by the question we find the old poets everywhere representing the people as asking of voyagers- “Are they pirates?”- as if those who are asked the question would have no idea of disclaiming the imputation, or their interrogators of reproaching them for it. The same rapine prevailed also by land. And even at the present day many of Hellas still follow the old fashion, the Ozolian Locrians for instance, the Aetolians, the Acarnanians, and that region of the continent; and the custom of carrying arms is still kept up among these continentals, from the old piratical habits. The whole of Hellas used once to carry arms, their habitations being unprotected and their communication with each other unsafe; indeed, to wear arms was as much a part of everyday life with them as with the barbarians. And the fact that the people in these parts of Hellas are still living in the old way points to a time when the same mode of life was once equally common to all.

Thucydides’ reference to Homer indicates the remote antiquity of this piratical, nomadic attitude. To this end Thucydides could have perhaps quoted that part of Odysseus’ speech, where he refers proudly to a certain way of life that must have been instantly recognizable to his audience: “Work was never a pleasure for me, nor home-keeping thrift, which nourishes good children. But for me oared ships were always a pleasure, and wars, and well-polished spears and arrows.” Not merely the love of war and adventure, but the rejection of work, of home-keeping domesticity, the raising of children, the rejection of the whole world of preservation and mere life around which the primitive nomos is oriented. All later aristocracies, indeed, even if they did not go to the extreme of valuing pillage and piracy, maintained an antagonistic attitude to the peasant, the serf, the tiller of the soil and the preservation of mere life. The famous motto of the Roman aristocracy was “Bellum et Otium”; in marked distinction, of course, to the later Christian “Ora et Labora.”

To explain the martial dominance by pastoral peoples over farming peoples, other writers have focused on the fact that among pastoral populations, wealth (measured in herds, head of cattle, etc.) is highly mobile and therefore easy to steal and rob; the “cattle raid” becomes a central “institution” of pastoral existence, and therefore the development of a warlike and piratical way of life is encouraged, for purposes of both defense and offense. A life on the move, often in difficult country, in any case encourages the development of physical and moral qualities that are conducive to martial prowess; for which likely reason plains-dwelling, farming populations have always recognized their hill- or mountain- dwelling neighbors as more formidable warriors—whether one considers 19th century India, or 3d century BC Rome.

There is a very striking way in which this specifically pastoral origin of the “aristocratic prejudice,” is preserved through centuries of Greek history. The contempt for settled life “in the valleys” and the city, accompanied by a sense that the man who sojourns in the wild outside the bounds of the city by himself communes, not only with sacred powers, but specifically with a purifying, liberating, revitalizing primal force reappears in Greek myth and in Greek aristocratic attitude in several characteristic ways. It is only out of an ancient intuition or inherited assumption of some kind that a superior principle of life and being existed outside the city bounds and human enactments, outside nomos, that the concept of nature could be born in the first place: the first mention of phusis is as regards the nature of a herb hidden deep in the wilderness, revealed to Odysseus only by the god Hermes, a nomad and transgressor of boundaries. (That the first reference of phusis is as regards a healing herb in the wilderness is especially telling: Pindar, indeed, identifies no other than the horse-man Chiron as the originator of the knowledge of the healing arts among men). The aristocratic-pastoralist contempt for the limitations of city life or communal life as such, and therefore of nomos, is what possibly allowed for the development of the idea of nature, understood first as a primal, secret knowledge outside the bounds of the city and of nomos, to be revealed by demonic beings, beast-men or horse-men, inhabiting the hills and mountains.

In this connection, there is still another great reason why the pastoral way of life is important to the aristocratic morality, and to the emergence of the idea of nature. This has to do with the matter of breeding. Aristocrats of pastoralist origin would be especially sensitive to the reality of breeding stocks, to the principles of animal husbandry and of the necessity of eugenic measures for the improvement of herd or specimen quality. Such attitudes and knowledge are likely to persist for the longest time even after the initial conquering population has “settled down” among the conquered, and perhaps even fused with them: it is likely to be passed down at least as part of an ancestral “aristocratic sensibility,” much like horse-riding had been passed down from the remotest antiquity among aristocrats, whether in archaic Greece or medieval Europe, for example. Thus we find that Greek aristocrats in Plato’s time enjoyed especially the past-time of breeding animals. 

The idea of breeding is then possibly the one great, decisive way that a principle different from that inherent in the “fundamental democracy” of primitive society develops in the first place. The principle behind the primitive “fundamental democracy” is rather one of taming. Where the early “democracy” is based on the leveling of all human differences under the absolute law of the ancestral, where the question is one of the preservation of the community, and therefore law or regime is synonymous with the taming of human nature, by contrast within aristocratic culture of pastoral origin, a principle different from the preservation of mere life begins to take shape concretely in the attempt to breed different human types and “improve” the stock, or more precisely, to breed one perfect human specimen. “Biological” preservation is replaced by “biological” improvement of quality. That an animal breeder and caretaker sees also yearly, in the births of new specimens, that there are behaviors and characters “in the blood,” or passed down and known somehow by a principle different from tribal education — this must also come as a crucial realization, even with the thrilling feeling of revelation at first.

Nearly all pastoral societies with a tradition of war and raiding, and certainly those of Eurasia—whether Turkic or Indo-European—have a unique institution known as the warband. It is found in no other cultural- linguistic complex: it consists of an independent military class, in particular one composed of bands of unmarried youths. Tacitus describes aspects of this institution that had survived among the Germanic tribes of his day, which he renders in an especially vivid way:

- Admirably adapted to the action of running alongside the cavalry is the swiftness of certain foot-soldiers, who are picked from the entire youth of their country, and stationed in front of the line. Their number is fixed — a hundred from each canton; and from this they take their name among their countrymen, so that what was originally a mere number has now become a title of distinction... If their native state sinks into the sloth of prolonged peace and repose, many of its noble youths voluntarily seek those tribes which are waging some war, both because inaction is odious to their race, and because they win renown more readily in the midst of peril, and cannot maintain a numerous following except by violence and war. Indeed, men look to the liberality of their chief for their war-horse and their bloodstained and victorious lance. Feasts and entertainments, which, though inelegant, are plentifully furnished, are their only pay. The means of this bounty come from war and rapine.

Furthermore the warband was understood to be essentially lawless, and of the wilderness—initiation into the warband meant life with companions in the wilderness. The youths saw themselves as wild dogs or wolves, and inhabited by the wilderness, outside the bounds of tribal convention. The warband was mythically associated with shape-shifting, “exernality,” the transgression of boundaries between the dead and the living, and so on. In fine, it represented in every way a transgression of nomos and its bounds as such, it enthusiastically embraced, not the preservation of mere life, but in fact death and a vital, martial, orgiastic element that was believed to reside in the wilderness, outside the boundaries home and of the tribe. This dangerous cultural institution, that could become a calamity for the tribe itself at any time—could it be that, aside from offering, as such, a model for “life outside convention” or a principle that is opposed to convention—could it be that it also forms the cultural prototype for the philosophical school or sect? And also forms the prototype for the piratical tyrant and his bodyguard or war band, above all law and all responsibility to home and hearth? Certainly it appears that Plato himself connected the tyrant to the “wolfish man,” and in turn both to the fraternity of young warriors. 

- Their bones show that the men buried in the shaft graves at Mycenae were big men, taller and broader than the typical inhabitants of Middle Helladic Greece. The men were also charioteers...Possession of horse and chariots seems to have been not an incidental, but a fundamental feature of Shaft Grave Mycenae, enabling to Myceneans to do whatever else they did. ...The shaft-grave princes at Mycenae belonged to an international elite. The same was true of the charioteers who took over lands in the Fertile Crescent. The Indo-European and Hurrian princes in the Levant maintained surprisingly close connections with each other over distances of hundreds of miles, exchanging not only lavish gifts but also daughters and sisters in marriage. Similarly, the Kassite aristocracy of southern Mesopotamia, held together by gifts, correspondence, and an interest in chariotry, was also assiduous in cultivating personal and diplomatic relations with the rulers of lands as far away as Egypt. The hyksos rulers in Egypt, at the beginning of the sixteenth century BC, seem to have been in touch with Crete as well as with Mesopotamia and, of course, the Levant. (In contrast, Mesopotamian and Egyptian kings in the eighteenth century BC were relatively parochial: in the voluminous documentation for Mesopotamia in the Age of Hammurabi there is no mention of Egypt.) The rulers of Mitanni and the imperial kings of Hatti likewise had close personal and diplomatic ties with their peers in other lands. James Breasted fittingly named the Late Bronze Age “The First International Civilization.” ...In utter contrast with the provincialism of Middle Helladic Greece, the shaft-grave dynasties [the first Greeks] delighted in the foreign and the exotic...In addition to the influences and imports from Crete, Egypt, Anatolia, and the Fertile Crescent, there is the gold. There are no gold mines in the Argolid, and the gold buried in the shaft graves necessarily came from far away, undoubtedly exchanged for more utilitarian commodities that the dynasts had squeezed from the subject population of the Argolid. The tastes of the new rulers at Mycenae have with reason been characterized as vulgar and barbarous, but they were indisputably cosmopolitan ...Nevertheless, we may still suppose that when PIE speakers took over the best parts of the Greek mainland—a land that seems to have had almost no political organization, and a populace that seems to have set little store by military prowess—they controled an alien population perhaps ten times as large as their own. Such was the ratio of helots to Spartiates at a much later time, and even the Greeks who took over a relatively well-organized Knossos ca. 1450 BC may not have numbered over a tenth of their Minoan subjects. 

This account rather specifically supports the claims regarding the origins of an aristocratic way of life or morality in the imposition of order from above, an imposition carried out by an alien, numerically smaller elite on a numerically much larger population, which is unmartial and parochial; this passage furthermore emphasizes that the conqueror and the conquered have—or actually did have, at least in the Greek case — very different origins, language, and way of life to begin with. It even provides a historical origin for the “cosmopolitan” hankering and delight “in the foreign and the exotic,” without which the relativity of custom from tribe to tribe, the relative and hence limited character of nomos, does not even begin to dawn on the human mind. Without this precise type of aristocracy as a social precondition, an extreme parochialism reigns, and there is no looking and no ability to look beyond the boundaries of one people’s nomos to begin with. The myth's of the “return of the sons of Heracles” and of the Catalog of Ships from the Iliad are especially relevant here, namely as concerns the unsettled, wild, and “alien” origins of aristocratic morality even much later in the historical Greek world.

The model here presented argues and brings considerable evidence to establish that the “primordial norm” to which the later Greek aristocracy looked back was one of wild, heroic, unsettled life; that the origins of the aristocratic ethos of the Classical Age can be found at the very beginning of Greek history, and Homer’s tale, the story of the Trojan War, which was so constitutive of the Greek aristocratic mind indeed throughout the history of that entire civilization, is not really the story of the Mycenean palace kingdoms at all. The Homeric sagas, and in particular the sack of Troy, is not the story of the palace-based princes of Mycenae or Pylos, but rather an early Iron Age raid carried out by barons from Thessaly—perhaps consisting of no more than fifty ships—and not by the now-ossified palace bureaucratic elite of the Mycenean world.

- Thessaly is something of a Hellenic cradle in Greek mythology. Here the original Hellas was located, and it was here that Prometheus begat Deucalion, Deucalion begat Hellen, and Hellen begat Aeolus, Dorus, and Xuthus...a great many myths have Thessalian connections, and some must have originated in Thessaly (for example the Titanomachy, the battle between the Lapiths and the Centaurs, the expedition of the Argonauts). It is from Thessaly that many of the heroic genealogies proceed, and, of course, it was Thessaly’s Mt. Olympus that the Greeks regarded as the home of the gods... There is then some reason to believe that the great Thessalian plain (far and away the largest plain in all of Greece) was the initial destination of the PIE speakers who came to the Greek mainland, and that from Thessaly the PIE speakers went on to subjugate the plains further to the south...If Thessaly was the original “home of the heroes,” we would expect to find that during the Mycenean Age there was a greater concentration of Greek speakers in Thessaly than elsewhere. Unusually good evidence to that effect comes from what is widely regarded as the earliest extant piece of Greek literature: the Catalog of the Ships, in the second book of the Iliad. In the catalog, which seems to have been composed when the geography of Mycenean Greece was still a living memory, almost one- quarter of the Achaeans’ ships...come from Thessaly...We may say with some confidence that early in the Dark Age the Greeks recalled that during the Age of the Heroes, more warriors had lived in Thessaly than anywhere else...

Thus what is preserved in Homer, and admired by his aristocratic audience both in the Archaic age and later, does not reflect a nostalgia for the settled cities and palaces of the Mycenean world, but for the more primitive, “feral” way of life preserved in the Greek “homeland” (or actually initial point of arrival and conquest) in the heroic wilds of Thessaly. So far from being understood as a series of repeated attempts to reestablish order and settled life, Greek history, especially Greek aristocratic history, should rather be understood as a series of raids and incursions that seek reestablish the opposite. The original “antinomian” aristocratic orientation is repeatedly revitalized. 

The myth of the “return of the sons of Heracles” in the Peloponnese is then to be understood after this fashion. The proto-Greek tribes from Thessaly, who had maintained a more primitive “aristocratic” war-band based form of social organization, invaded the Peloponnese anew after they destroyed the Mycenean palace regimes, marking the beginning of “Dorian” rule:

- The evidence would support a thesis that the Dorians “took over” a population whose first language was something other than Greek, and whose ancestors had been at the lower levels of Mycenean society. The legend of the Return of the Heraclidae may therefore have a basis in fact. As a charter myth, it bestowed legitimacy on those who told it: the Dorians are the descendants of Heracles, whose sons were wrongfully expelled from the Peloponnese. This legitimizing element in the legend is as fictitious as Heracles himself. However, the story that the newcomers in three divisions established three regimes in the Peloponnese—one in Laconia, one in Messenia, and one in the Argolid—can not be explained as a charter myth. The Dorians did establish themselves in these places, they did so by force (there is, as we have seen, no persuasive alternative), and they may have come to all three regions at about the same time. As has recently been pointed out, the legend of the return does not depict the Dorians as destroyers, nor as founders of a new way of life, but as conquerors (who, for example, merely displaced the ruling house in Messenia and coexisted with the rest of the Messenian population). If we imagine small companies of Dorians taking over the most profitable parts of the Peloponnese, we shall have no difficulty at all in explaining why other small companies went as far as Crete and even Rhodes: they went not in search of land that they themselves could cultivate, but in hopes of taking over an agricultural population inured to service.

Sparta was a “fossil,” preserving very early customs and regime form; and is therefore especially valuable in understanding what is fundamental or original to the Greek aristocratic orientation. The importance of Sparta and other Dorian-type regimes for the aristocratic Greek value system, and particularly in the work of Plato and Xenophon, is a commonplace in the literature. But what it appeared to have consisted in, yet again, is the imposition and preservation of a “wild,” war-band based, martially regimented but, most of all, unsettled way of life on top of a servile, provinicial, settled way of life. The latter is only prized insofar as it gives greater freedom and intensity of expression to the former. 

Nomos as universally exists among primitive cultures is already, from the beginning of Greek history, understood only as valuable insofar as it provides service for a higher and external principle. The polis — what Nietzsche calls “the aristocratic commonwealth” of breeding — is unique because of how it was able to accommodate and elevate what has been in this chapter called the “aristocratic” or “pastoral” way of life within the bounds of static, settled life; it represents a compromise between a “lower” and a “higher” that are of alien origin to each other. But in this compromise or fusion it is decidedly the “aristocratic” element that is determinative and constitutive of the new order. And it is this element of absolute unmooring from the settled, democratic rule of the ancestral customs that, when the actual aristocracies are in political and social decline in the late Archaic age, is radicalized, recovered, refined, and made abstract, not only by the philosophical way of life and its discovery of nature, but by the way of life of the tyrant.

The way in which the principle of individual distinction and superiority is manifested in Homer is in one’s standing out among, and therefore leading, many armed men: and in turn this is done by exhibition of battlefield prowess, and of good counsel in assembly. These two primal Homeric virtues — andreia and phronesis — are later refined and abstracted, but not lost, in Plato and Pindar. But the fundamental principle of breeding as the foundation for this personal distinction—the low valuation, that is, of the idea that true virtue can be taught and therefore the low valuation of nomos as mere instruction, leveling, or indoctrination —is what must be emphasized, even in Homer. Therefore the discussion of magnificence and superiority in Homer is often presented with direct analogy to animal life and with similes depicting animal powers.

It is telling that in aristocratic Greek language and in the language of Homer there are quite a few ways to express the fact that one man is better than another. But none of these comparatives—karteros, iskhuroteros, pherteros, ameinon, beltion, and especially not the agathos aner or esthlos that aristocrats even at the time of Pindar used for themselves—none of these refers to virtues of piety or ability to tell divine laws, or ability to foretell oracles, and the like. Manipulation of magic, prayers to the gods, religious activity, etc., is not prized in this fashion; the shaman is not an impressive specimen and not in the running for rank. And so, although the seer Kalkhas is a man of great repute among the Akhaian host, and consulted on the most important divine matters, Agamemnon dismisses him (and also the local priest of Apollo) in the most contemptuous way, without any fear of incurring punishment from anyone. These are kings who, though they indeed receive title to rule in a circuitous way by reference to “ancestry”—they have, after all, divine pedigrees—nevertheless receive the most legitimacy and honor from objective and manifest qualities or virtues: chief among these being, the possession of a large war band, personal courage in battle, and ability to give good counsel in the assembly of armed men.

Indeed, it has been speculated that the initial quarrel between Achilles and Agamemnon is a quarrel between nature and convention in embryo, so to speak. Agamemnon holds the royal scepter, indicating conventional and ancestral title to rule; but in challenging him Achilles, recognized by all to be the stronger and more excellent hero, swears an oath on a scepter of nature, a sprouting tree branch — this is incidentally the second and only instance of a word with the same root as phusis in the whole of Homer. Kingship here, that is, the just or right kingship, depends as much on proven and manifest martial and even intellectual prowess as on ancestral traditions and pedigrees; indeed these are perceived as inseperable, and what binds them, we will see, is precisely nature, that is, heredity, blood. In this connection, consider only the series of similes that precedes the famous Catalog of Ships. The entire passage is riveting: it begins when, a meal ending, Nestor, the eldest of the kings, enjoins Agamemnon to delay no longer, but to call the heralds to gather together the army, and for the kings to go through the camp themselves and “awaken sharp Ares.” The Zeus-nurtured kings gather around Agamemnon, speeding swiftly on their chariots through the camp and among them appears white-eyed Athena, bearing the aegis, encouraging the Akhaians: she awakens strength in the heart of each man to make war and fight, “and to these war became sweeter than to sail back in their hollow ships to the land of their fathers.” Heroic warrior kings together with their patron goddess make the men forget the ancestral in favor of the excitement of battle abroad and the prospect of future glory. At this point Homer begins his similes that describe the transformed host of men.

The behavior of human tribes is understood in Homer in much the same way as the behavior of animal packs, flocks, etc., not only in the sense that each has a certain characteristic behavior of its own that may be called with the same word “way,” but also, and maybe more significant, in the sense that the human tribe is understood to have the same natural existence and cohesion as the animal one: both are understood as “natural” and organic groups.

Human hierarchy, graced and intensified by the god, becomes as manifest as the hierarchy of a chief bull in a herd of cattle. It is again by observation of the animal world, and perhaps even through the long practice of breeding livestock, that an alternative principle of hierarchy coupled with an alternative principle of ancestry—observed descent of concrete physical qualities by blood and breeding as opposed to the authority of ancestral stories and laws—could have developed. This is not the only place where Homeric heroes are compared to animals: it suffices to bring up the recurrent similes comparing them to lions on the hunt or being hunted, for example Diomedes at the beginning of Book V when he is experiencing his aristeia, or moment of highest glory. Such similes seem to occur when a statement is made on the opposition of the one superior individual to the inferior many, or when a statement is made regarding hierarchy of men in terms of natural excellences, or when a statement is made regarding the opposition of tribes to each other.

The conclusion one can provisionally draw from this is that nature, as a standard different from and ultimately antagonistic to the “fundamental democracy” of “rule by the ancestral,” seems to erupt into consciousness or to manifest itself first of all as animal power and as animal hierarchy. And it is with reference to this and similar phenomena that early aristocracy understands itself and justifies itself. We now therefore consider the full elaboration of this concept of nature—the prerequisite both of the philosophical and the tyrannical life—in Pindar’s poetry.

## The Idea of Nature in Pindar 

- In rams and asses and horses, Cyrnus, we seek the thoroughbred, and a man is concerned therein to get him offspring of good stock; yet in marriage a noble man thinketh not twice of wedding the bad daughter of a bad sire if the father give him many possessions, nor doth a woman disdain the bed of a bad man if he be wealthy, but is fain rather to be rich than to be good. For ’tis possessions they prize; and a noble man weddeth of bad stock and a bad man of noble; race is confounded of riches. In like manner, son of Polypaus, marvel thou not that the race of thy townsmen is made obscure; ’tis because the noble are mixed with the bad.

- Under all laws the straight-spoken man excels, whether by the side of a tyranny, or whenever the furious mob, or when the wise watch over the city.

- I bring the teaching of Cheiron.

Pindar's odes are composed on the occasion of athletic victories at four athletic competitions, and were commissioned by the victor or by his family. Accordingly the odes necessarily reflect the tastes, interests, and sensibilities of Pindar’s aristocratic patrons and of the aristocratic audience, since these works were composed to be performed in public. The work of Pindar is then an indispensible source for trying to understand ancient Greek aristocracy in the way it understood itself, and indeed for understanding the general features of aristocratic regimes as such.

Established thus far is the idea that an ascending aristocracy establishes itself almost exclusively from the outside, by foreign conquest, on top of a sedentary population, and usually is erected by a pastoralist warrior elite that continues to rule, at least in the beginning, as a separate tribal group. A principle of nature, phusis, emerges from the exigencies of the way of life of the conquering elite. Though mentioned only twice in Homer, the principle of nature acknowledges for the first time a reality that exists outside human law, tradition, and convention—outside and in opposition to nomos—and which is somehow associated with biological observations regarding breeding or blood—in the case of Homer both references are botanical, to be precise. An aristocracy in decline, in danger, its members faced with imminent extinction of their liberty—if not of their lives—but, more pertinently, with the decline and decay of their traditions, severe laws, in sum, of their regime understood quite literally as a form of training, diet, gymnastic both of the body and spirit: this decline and danger produces the two closely related types, the philosopher and the tyrant. The means by which this happens is through a radicalization of the standard of nature, that is first undertaken as it were ideologically, in defense of aristocracy.

The decline in question is both internal and external. Externally, the aristocracy faces frequent challenges to its material power and, ideologically, to its claim to rule. These challenges are made in the name of the commons or of democracy but, as is almost always the case throughout history, it is not “the people” themselves who are acting as a political force —a jacquerie is not a revolution and is generally easily put down—but other disaffected aristocrats, intellectuals, merchants, and various elite factions who are claiming to represent the people. In defense of the legitimate claims of aristocracy to rule appear poets, and later intellectuals, who invoke the idea of nature. It is most significant that in their defense of aristocracy these writers—in the case in question consider Pindar and Theognis—do not refer only to “tradition,” to family genealogy, or to the divine provenance of existing laws and social forms. Rather, they share the argument that the aristocracy rules because it is physically, intellectually, and spiritually supreme, that such virtue or arete cannot be taught, and that it is a matter of blood, of birth and of nature.

There is something very “unstable” about this defense of aristocratic rule. If the standard for rule is virtue and ultimately nature (phusis) then what guarantee does one have that the traditional ruling classes of any particular city are really in congruence with the natural order of rank between man and man? This tension between nature and tradition, or phusis and nomos, is, as we have seen, unique to the Greeks, and may be said to have at least implicitly existed from a very early time in the Greek mind. To bring up the Homeric examples, did not Achilles, the most beautiful of the Achaians and the best warrior, challenge that mediocrity Agamemnon, who was merely king by ancestral right and convention? Agamemnon, although recognized as having the supreme authority, has recourse to custom, to nomos, when he speaks holding the ancestral royal scepter. But Achilles swears an oath on a sprouting branch, on a scepter of nature: in fact, this is one of only two instances of the word phusis in all of Homer’s opus. The other instance, to remind the reader, is at Odyssey 10.303, when Hermes shows Odysseus the secret phusis of a healing plant. Phusis exists as a standard apart even from the divine, and outside the power of the divine; nature exists apart from both the divine and from convention and could be argued to be superior in power even to the divine. Agamemnon has recourse to nomos and to ancestral, i.e., divine right; but Achilles invokes the superior right of greater virtue and excellence, of nature, which is also inborn, but clearly different than genealogy as such.

Arete, virtue, excellence, is what undergirds an aristocracy’s claim to rule, and excellence is defined first most concretely as prowess in battle and ability to give good political counsel, or to put it in Greek traditional language, andreia (manliness, bravery) and phronesis (prudence, practical wisdom). Two elements are required for arête to come about: nature or bloodline being the first, most important, and most indispensible; but second, also, training. It must not be forgotten that, although nature first appears as a principle “opposed” to convention or tradition, early aristocrats are not intellectualized philosophers, nor are they tyrants, but are themselves a historically concrete people or tribe, and therefore themselves live by their own tradition and nomos. Indeed, part of aristocracy’s claim to rule is that its members are the most faithful preservers of ancient customs, genealogies, esoteric religious knowledge, and so on. That is to say, aristocratic traditions are distinguished from the traditions of the commons or of a primitive egalitarian tribe by the fact that these traditions consist of a breeding and training regime, to be understood in both cases quite literally. The purpose of this regime of breeding and training is the production of a specimen that biologically embodies arête, excellence, and possesses contempt for death as well as for mere life.

[excerpt from paideia]

Pindar’s own explicit uses of the word “nature” — phusis — and associated forms of the verb from which phusis itself is derived, namely the verb phuein, and the noun phue, (or phua in this Doric) seem at first sight to have multiple meanings, not directly related. But there is one fundamental meaning we can be sure of. Nature, phusis, phue, refers first of all, and always, and above all, to a concrete material reality, to a biological reality that means very plainly: “the body.” When Pindar speaks of a body that is alive he uses the word phue. Thus, already in this distinction there is an important clue as to the full meaning of phusis. There is a botanical association in both Homeric usages of “nature.” The branch on which Achilles lays his great oath is said to be sprouting, and is contrasted to the dead wooden scepter in Agamemnon’s hands, which stands for the authority granted from mere convention.

The matter in question from the first Olympian Ode, as in the example mentioned before regarding Apollo and Cheiron, is in this case one of finding a proper marriage the issue of which results in a race of heroes, leaders of the people, who are eager for fine deeds that win acclaim. The rest of the passage, referring to Pelops’ desire to find such a marriage only as part of his search for danger and glory, in which utter contempt for mere life is expressed as a matter of course, is entirely in keeping with the fundamentally aristocratic meaning of nature. That is, this desire for glory comes upon him at the moment of the very blossoming and emergence of his phue, his body or his nature.

Phue is meant as standing in contrast to the dead or passive corpse, soma; as having a particular affinity for “botanical” meanings, especially those having to do with bounty, with being all-fruitful, with energy; Pindar makes the metaphorical connection between the botanical meaning and Pelops’ body or phue. So far then, the meaning of nature is purely in reference to the physical body on one hand; yet, on the other, it is already a term of distinction, referring only to particular types of bodies, or bodies in a particular condition. In praise of a wrestling victor at the Isthmian games who has particular skill and ferocity but is slight of frame, Pindar says that:

- in the toil of conflict he resembles the spirit of loud-roaring lions in boldness, while in wisdom he is like the fox, who forestalls the swoop of the eagle by falling on her back. And it is right to do anything to blot out (maurosai literally: darken/make dim) one’s enemy. For Melissus was not allotted the nature of Orion; he is negligible to look at, though heavy to grapple with in his strength. And yet once there went from Thebes, Cadmus’ city, a hero short in stature but unflinching in spirit...

Pindar could have used the word “size,” but he chose phusis, and the comparison made is to a mythical hunter of great skill; Melissus’ stature or phusis is in question because it is surprisingly small for a victor of such strength and skill. Finally, let us note here for the moment another important clue, a concept which will come up again: in the context of discussing Melissus’ special skills, strength, and phusis at the moment of his victory, i.e., at the very moment of Melissus’ phusis emerging, and emerging into the light, Pindar says that it is right to do anything to blot out, or literally to darken, to dim one’s enemy. In another special emphasis on the purely material and concrete meaning of phusis/phue, Heracles in a prayer to Zeus asks that Telamon’s son Aias have a nature or body as indestructible as the skin of the Nemean lion:

- And Heracles stretched his invincible hands up to heaven and said, “Father Zeus, if you have ever heard my prayers with a willing heart, now, now with divine prayers I entreat you to grant this man a brave son from Eriboea, a son fated to be my guest-friend. May he have a body (phue) as invulnerable as this skin that is now wrapped around me, from the beast whom I killed that day in Nemea as the very first of my labors. And may he have spirit to match. When he had spoken, the god sent to him the king of birds, a great eagle. He felt thrilled inside with sweet joy, and he spoke like a prophet: “Telamon, you will have the son that you ask for. Name him after the bird that appeared: wide-ruling Aias, awesome in the war-toils of the people.

Thus phue here refers merely to the physical body; and the spirit—to be understood here not as a metaphysical soul, but as the fighting spirit or anger of a lion—thumos, is considered something quite apart. Thus even in the most casual references to “merely” material bodies or the properties of bodies, phusis and phue always appear endowed with religious gravity, with reference to great energy, skill, or strength, to the fruitfulness or titanic powers of untamed nature, and in connection often with marriage and breeding. In both cases a great hero embarks on an adventure of danger and death, showing contempt for mere life and a desire to win a great renown on the occasion of the blooming of his own phua. In both cases a young adventurer bests an aboriginal king, marries or seduces his daughter, and wins great renown or founds a great line of leaders. Thus we are alerted in both cases to the special and full meaning of phua, body, nature. It is concrete, material, biological body; and it is much more. In both cases it seems to have to do with the emergence of a body in supreme condition into the enduring radiance of fame—of being—and with the perpetuation of a divine bloodline.

- But since ancient grace sleeps, and mortals are forgetful of whatever does not reach the highest bloom of skillful song, joined to glorious streams of words, then begin the victory procession with a sweet-singing hymn for Strepsiades; for he is the victor in the pancratium at the Isthmus, both awesome in his strength and handsome to look at; and he treats/holds excellence (areta) as not uglier/more shameful/inferior to body (phue). He is made radiant by the violet-haired Muses, and he has given a share in his flowering garland to his uncle and namesake, for whom Ares of the bronze shield mixed the cup of destiny; but honor is laid up as recompense for good men.

The translator has herself recognized that phue as Pindar uses it is always a term of distinction, and that while it indeed refers to a concrete material body or to a “stature” or a physique, it is always in the sense of its outstanding condition: in this case rendered as its “beauty.” Yet, if we are to accept this conventional translation even temporarily, we must add that this is a beauty pregnant with violent power and energy, “beauty as power,” something akin to Michelangelo’s Moses. Strepsiades is said to be marvelous or terrible in his strength (sthenos)—the word used is striking: ekpaglos, a form of “outstanding” that carries connotations of physical violence and terrible power. Strepsiades is said to be idein morphaeis, shapely to look at, well-formed, with the same adjective used of sculpted statues. The reference to phue is entirely in this context, and “body” must be understood only in this context and this condition. Strepsiades, endowed with such an awesome physique and violent power, holds the doing of great deeds (areta) in equal reverence as his own impressive nature or body. 

This obedience is expressed as their being ever ready to abandon safety and mere life for the danger of death and the winning of a great renown; but the point would seem to be that phua literally carries some compulsory or irresistible power that orients and propels them to deeds of areta. Recall how the ode above starts, with an enumeration of Thebes’ great glories, of which people are forgetful. Mortals — not men, andres — but mortals, anthropoi, people, are forgetful of great deeds. They live in darkness, forgetting, for they themselves are dim and dark, ignorant, or envious. Their envy and ignorance covers up reality. They cover up reality under a stream of falsehoods and words. **Real men, andres, have being, or have more being.** They have reverence for their being, or body, and listen to its vehement calling—they can’t help but listen, or obey in this case. **Everywhere in Pindar there is the elevation of this vehement being, blood, or will, silent and effective in real men, extolled and memorialized in splendid songs—and that exists in distinction to the chatter, the word-obsessed envy, the darkness of the many.** Bred phua is more real than other bodies, which are shrouded in darkness. These men are apparent and manifest in their great deeds; the watchful eye of the seer, the poet, picks these out and preserves the deeds in words to make them apparent, visible, through time, to make their fame or being endure. Strepsiades’ phua or intensified reality is what makes him become “radiant” and emerge from a primeval and undifferentiated darkness. **This is truth and reality, and this is nature.**

(Note-to-self: Being is true is stepping into the light is glory radiant splendor golden gleaming; Pindar page I found; Heidegger)

**Nature and the Body as Blood and Heredity; Heredity as Truth**

(Note-to-self: Miya's knowledge stored in the blood)

Nature is body and blood and is therfore hereditary. Knowledge of breeding and heredity is, again, to be expected among a pastoral or originally pastoral people who have long experience with livestock breeds. Furthermore, when war and hunting are highly prized, there is also an emphasis on the breeding of horses and of dogs, which we know to have been of special interest to the Greek aristocracy. The most comprehensive reference to nature in the context of heredity in Pindar concerns, however, not a comparison to livestock or animals, but, yet again, to the world of plants and crops. A fourth instance where Pindar compares phusis to the generational flowering of the trees, plants, and crops is in the sixth Nemean Ode and especially instructive:

- There is one race of men, one race of gods; and from a single mother we both draw our breath. But all allotted power divides us: man is nothing, but for the gods the bronze sky endures as a secure home forever. Nevertheless, we bear some resemblance to the immortals, either in greatness of mind or in nature, although we do not know, by day or by night, towards what goal fortune has written that we should run. Even now Alcimidas gives a great sign to be seen that his inborn is like the fruitful fields, which, in alternation, at one time give men yearly sustenance from the plains, and at another time gather strength from repose. He has come from the lovely games of Nemea, the contest-contending boy who, pursuing this ordinance of Zeus, has shown that he is a successful hunter in the wrestling ring, by planting his step in the tracks of his grandfather, his blood-relative.

(Note-to-self: Victory to the Gods; To Victory and Perseverance)

Nature hides, lays dormant, occasionally manifests itself in explosive actions. Pindar repeats exactly this same idea at Nemean 11, even claiming to see evidence of cross-breeding; where, however, instead of the word phusis or phua, or inborn, he just directly uses the matter-of-fact “blood,” haima; as clear an indication as any about what “nature” and the nature of a man or a being means in Pindar:

- Truly, it was easy to recognize in him the ancient blood of Peisander of Sparta, who came from Amyclae with Orestes, leading here a bronze-armored host of Aetolians, and also the blending of his blood with that of his mother’s ancestor Melanippus, beside the stream of the Ismenus. But ancient excellence yields strength in alternate generations of men; the dark fields do not give fruit continuously, nor are trees accustomed to bear an equal wealth of fragrant flowers in every circling year, but in alternation. And thus the race of mortal men is led by Fate. But no clear sign comes to mortals from Zeus. Nevertheless we embark on bold endeavors, longing for many deeds, for our limbs are bound by shameless hope, while the streams of foresight lie far away. But we must hunt for due measure in our love of gain. The madness of unattainable desires is too sharp.

These odes were not written for performance in front of the mob, of democratic parties, or of factions representing them, with the purpose to convince them of the rightness of aristocratic rule. These were meant for private exhibition for an aristocratic audience that didn’t need “extra reasons” to believe in its own legitimacy. These were not men who in any case felt the need to justify themselves, or, as we will see, “to come with five reasons ready” to justify their position — such an attitude was held to be in bad taste, and to be held under suspicion. One has authority, one commands, one doesn’t need to give reasons; reasons, justifications, rationalizations—these are for plebeians and the envious.

What is inborn, nature, is said to give a “sign to be seen,” or a visible mark. It is in overt action that nature is revealed. The word here used is tekmar, and it is of special significance: it refers to a concrete, manifest visible mark or sign, evidence that impresses itself directly on the perception in action or image, not something explained in logos or speech or logically deduced. This sense of nature becoming apparent or emerging into the light is reinforced when Alkimidas is later described as enagonios, which above I have rendered quite literally as “contest-contending” or “loving contests,” but which also carries meanings of “vivid, apparent, energetic.” The fact that this last word has the double meaning—both “one who loves the agon, the contest” and “something vivid, vehement, apparent, energetic”—is by itself quite revealing. Nature of man only manifests itself in great deeds and in victory in contests. The aristocracy’s understanding of itself, and for itself, was entirely dependent on the flowering or manifestation of areta, of excellence, of power that bests others in contest. Heredity and nature here don’t mean just genealogy or hereditary conventional right. 

- But all allotted power divides us: man is nothing, but for the gods the bronze sky endures as a secure home forever. Nevertheless, we bear some resemblance to the immortals, either in greatness of mind or in nature, although we do not know, by day or by night, towards what goal fortune has written that we should run. Even now Alcimidas...

Men are said to bear some resemblance to the gods in nature (phusin) or in greatness of mind (megan noon). The qualifier of “great” is not seen, here or elsewhere, as ever necessary to describe phusis — phusis is itself great by definition. By contrast, noos is not necessarily intellectual power but may be translated as intent, or intentionality, the mind as a “purpose.” Thus in great striving or grand intent on one hand, and in nature or body on the other, men are in some sense like the immortals. To find out in what way (some) men are the same as the immortals, first ask, then, in what way are men different? Unlike the immortals who endure forever in the bronze sky, men live in obscurity and darkness, quite literally. Obscurity, forgetfulness and ignorance being two sides of the same coin: in darkness, as in, ignorant of their fate, goal, and future; and in darkness also as in, forgotten, not known, not apparent or manifest, not having being, or more precisely, intensity of being and of body, not having phusis. Most people do not have phusis. Phusis is not a reference then merely to inborn character, specific orientation in the abstract, inclination and so on—though it is that as well: but crucially, because most alien to our understanding—there is a question here of intensity. Some beings are more than others; they have more being, more nature. Phusis, the truth or the knowledge of a being, is not “discovered” by deduction, but only manifests itself in action if the being in question should have enough phusis. It is not just a question of beings having “different natures” or inclinations, but more fundamentally, of having “enough nature,” enough intensity that the truth of the being may become differentiated from the fundamental and indistinct darkness.

- So, by trial, Erginos, the Argonaut, was saved from the reproach of the Lemnian women. Unsuccessful before, he won the race in armor, and said to Hypsipyle as he went after the crown: “This is what I am in swiftness. My hands and heart fully match my feet. The race is for the young, but I am younger than my seeming. Gray hairs grow often on young men before the time. The final trial is the test of mortals.” Psaumis had every virtue but success; now this is added. So Erginos was a man of might, of courage; now he has shown his speed.

The meaning should be taken quite literally: Psaumis, like Erginos, have finally shown who they are: phue, phusis, body only becomes apparent, real, only possesses being, and bloodline is only proven at the hour of its triumph in contest, during the exhibition of a great feat of excellence, of great physical strength, of victory in battle, of violent victory over an opponent, or over a challenge as in the case of Pelops or Jason. **It is in this that truth, being, reality, are known, literally become apparent at all.** The default condition of nature then is that it lies concealed or dormant, especially in intervening generations, but that it explodes or erupts with irresistible power in the world and impresses itself on the observer with equal violence. In almost every case where Pindar refers to the hereditary and inborn property of nature, there is some reference also to a word indicating manifestation, revelation, the bringing out of something from the forgotten or concealed into the realm of the visible, and so on. The true measure of the man, his nature, is in all these cases revealed: heredity and blood become apparent in body. Reduced to mere body, to utter destitution, a shipwreck, or, in the case of his father Laertes, to an unkempt tiller of the soil, the blood of a king, and the fact of heredity—the phusis, nature, the truth about a being—reveals itself precisely in this reduction to bare biology.

The standard of nature, of the body or the blood, introduces a different understanding of variety and a different way to measure it: the body itself, with its innate inclinations and desires, is not the product of human speech or laws. Where law and teaching can suffice for the mass of men with less nature or less reality—it has its place in ensuring the public peace and the humble dignity of the commons—convention can’t explain the highest achievements, highest areta or highest arts, for it has little or no part in the ultimate cause of these. Nomos or convention homogenizes and equalizes, this is its purpose: if behavior at its peak, however, is primarily explained by inheritance and blood, this necessarily decreases not only the explanatory power of nomos regarding human behavior and variety, but its authority and dignity.

- If a man has devoted his whole spirit to excellence, sparing neither expense nor toils, it is right to grant the boast of manliness to those who achieve excellence, with an ungrudging mind. For it is an easy gift for a wise man to speak words of praise in recompense for labors of all kinds and thus to promote the common good. Different wages for different deeds are sweet to men, to the shepherd and the ploughman and the bird-trapper, and the man whom the sea nourishes. Every man is intent upon keeping persistent famine from his belly. But he who wins rich renown in the games or in war receives the highest gain: to be well spoken of by his fellow-citizens and by strangers, the choicest bloom of speech.

The purpose of nomos is to “keep persistent famine from the belly”— preservation of mere life. When nomos or convention outsteps this or pretends to, when it is forgotten that “he who wins rich renown in the games or in war” belongs to a different reality and owes his origins to a different principle, then nomos becomes something else, it becomes a systematic and perverse covering-up of nature, party to the forgetfulness of nature and the hierarchy between man and man that exists in nature. The highest type of man is the product of a breeding program, and not of an educational program of nomos. The boast of manliness, andreia, is alone granted to such a man; other males are not men, andres, but mere anthropoi, indistinct beings with anthropoid form. This man is driven by the impetus of his blood with such vehemence that all the common laws, all of nomos, would for him be a Procrustes’ bed: it is best for such a man to follow the inclinations of his nature and not nomos. The product of his action is areta, loosely translated as virtue or excellence.

(Note-to-self: Kant science is poor is extension Hölderlin Heraclitus Pindar beauty is glory is real is truth)

- Various men have various arts. It is right for a man to follow straight paths, and strive according to his nature (phuai). For strength manifests itself in action, and intelligence in counsels, for those who have the inborn (sungenes) skill of foreseeing the future.

Men pursuing high achievement should strive according to nature and not be misled or “educated” by convention or teaching. The “standard” high achievement for a man is to possess areta — and let us remember that “virtue” here refers ultimately to the ability to be a good leader in war, namely to possess andreia and phronesis, battle prowess and ability to give good war counsel: “strength manifests itself in action, and intelligence in counsels.” Convention, speech, can’t mandate or teach this. Like the art of the wise man, Pindar’s own art, which is analogous to the art of the king—more on this shortly—it is inborn. Though a certain kind of training may be necessary to cultivate it, this is not primarily a matter of being taught, and certainly not being taught by nomos or custom, but of being bred. The primary function of nomos is “social control,” homogenization, taming, tribal survival, the continuation and preservation of mere life—through a regime of commands, speech and teaching that covers up and suppresses nature. Excellence, virtue, on the other hand, is a matter of nature, of blood, and it cannot be taught. Maybe the climax of Pindar’s thoughts on nature are revealed in this explicitly negative attitude to teaching, the taught, what we might call the “try-hards”:

- A man with inborn glory has great weight; but he who has only learned is a man in darkness, breathing changeful purposes, never taking an unwavering step, but trying his hand at countless forms of excellence with his ineffectual thought. But golden-haired Achilles, staying in the home of Philyra as a child, played at great deeds, often brandishing in his hands a javelin with a short blade; swift as the wind, he dealt death to wild lions in battle, and he slew wild boars and carried their panting bodies to the Centaur, son of Cronus, first when he was six years old, and afterwards for all the time he spent there. Artemis and bold Athena gazed at him with wonder, as he slew deer without the help of dogs and crafty nets; for he excelled with his feet. I have this story as it was told by earlier generations. Deep-thinking Cheiron reared Jason under his stone roof, and later Asclepius, whom he taught the gentle-handed laws of remedies. And he arranged a marriage for Peleus with the lovely-bosomed daughter of Nereus, and brought up for her their incomparable child, nurturing his spirit with all fitting things, so that when the blasts of the sea-winds sent him to Troy, he might withstand the spear-clashing war-shout of the Lycians and Phrygians and Dardanians; and when he came into close conflict with the spear-bearing Ethiopians, he might fix it in his mind that their leader, powerful Memnon the kinsman of Helenus, should not return to his home. From that point the light of the Aeacids has been fixed to shine far. Zeus, it is your blood and your contest at which my song aimed its shot, shouting the joy of this land with the voices of young men

(Note-to-self: Anybody of high birth immediately recognizes this and anyone of poor birth obviously is blind to it. Nobility and distinction from the commons manifests recognition of superiority, inborn excellence, better than the commons, worthy of more, not to be compared or treated like the rest. Poor has no such view, he is rotten filth at the bottom of the barrel, he does not want competition he does not want distinction from others because he is nothing, he wants manufactured darkness of homogenoizing blob to hide his ugliness and filth.)

Areta, excellence, or virtue, is the matter at hand here. The prerequisite is that it must be inborn, or rather, that an orientation and ability for areta is inborn; it is not learned. And, more significantly given the discussion above, the word here used for those who have merely learned is psephenos: the dark, obscure, dim. This same thought is echoed in another ode where Pindar repeats:

- That which is inborn/by nature is always the best; but many men strive to win glory with excellence that comes from training. Anything in which a god has no part is none the worse for being quelled in silence. For some roads lead farther than others, and a single occupation will not nourish us all. The paths to skill are steep; but, while offering this prize of song, boldly shout aloud that this man, by the blessing of the gods, was born with deftness of hand and litheness of limb, and with valor in his eyes and at the banquet of Aias son of Oileus he laid his victorious garland on the altar.

The men who learn only, who seek didaktais aretais, “learned excellences,” are men in darkness and in silence. Men who have not just a different nature, but who have sufficient nature, who have more nature, more reality, are revealed, become apparent or emerge to the sight of the seer as if from a primordial and undifferentiated swamp or morass. This is the world of nomos, the world of the many—it should be clear from Pindar’s depreciation of conventional learning or training (“those who have only learned,” “learned excellence”) that by corollary nomos itself, whatever utilitarian value it may have in maintaining an illusion of common good or common peace, has no value when it comes to the most important thing, virtue itself. For nomos stands or falls by teaching, conventional training, inculcation. But it cannot teach virtue, the arts of leadership, physical strength and daring, or wisdom. Indeed, convention likely has a negative value insofar as it is an expression of collective ignorance and forgetfulness, not privy to the light of truth: this last only emerges as in a flash through phusis, body, blood, biological breeding made apparent through great action.

- let Hagesidamus, victorious as a boxer at Olympia, offer thanks to Ilas, just as Patroclus did to Achilles. With the help of a god, one man can sharpen another who is born for excellence, and encourage him to tremendous achievement. Without toil only a few have attained joy, a light of life above all labors.

Chiron is responsible not only for the raising and training of heroes— he teaches them, most significantly, the gentle remedies of natural plants — but also for their breeding; for he has arranged Achilles’ very conception. The word used to describe Chiron in another ode is agroteron, of the fields, or “beast of the wild”. Chiron is the teacher of heroes for a reason; he is the ultimate trainer or cultivator or “sharpener” of inner breeding and nature. This training can only take place outside the city—this is not education by convention or by the city. The reader may be reminded of Machiavelli’s own esoteric interpretation of this fact:

- You must know there are two ways of contesting, the one by the law, the other by force; the first method is proper to men, the second to beasts; but because the first is frequently not sufficient, it is necessary to have recourse to the second. Therefore it is necessary for a prince to understand how to avail himself of the beast and the man. This has been figuratively taught to princes by ancient writers, who describe how Achilles and many other princes of old were given to the Centaur Chiron to nurse, who brought them up in his discipline; which means solely that, as they had for a teacher one who was half beast and half man, so it is necessary for a prince to know how to make use of both natures, and that one without the other is not durable. A prince, therefore, being compelled knowingly to adopt the beast, ought to choose the fox and the lion; because the lion cannot defend himself against snares and the fox cannot defend himself against wolves. Therefore, it is necessary to be a fox to discover the snares and a lion to terrify the wolves. Those who rely simply on the lion do not understand what they are about. Therefore a wise lord cannot, nor ought he to, keep faith when such observance may be turned against him, and when the reasons that caused him to pledge it exist no longer.

- if one says something well, that saying goes forth speaking with an immortal voice. And the radiance of fine deeds, forever unquenchable, has crossed the fruitful earth and the sea. May we win the favor of the Muses and kindle that torch of song, a worthy garland from the pancratium for Melissus, too, the scion of the race of Telesias. For in the toil of conflict he resembles the spirit of loud-roaring lions in boldness, while in wisdom he is like the fox, who forestalls the swoop of the eagle by falling on her back. And it is right to do anything to blot out one’s enemy.

This concerns a race of leaders who have bred both the lion and the fox—war-spirit and wisdom, andreia and phronesis—within themselves and for their offspring. Breeding and education to nature is then literally a re-wilding, an animalization, a beastliness, a breeding of beastly character. This by corollary is and must be an escape from nomos, the conventions of the city and the many, from pious and mediocre platitudes and moralisms, from the conventions of peace. Nature, the truth about the world and about man, erupts into being, into radiance, or the light of knowledge, from the obscurity of the primordial darkness and forgetfulness in which mortal anthropoi are doomed to live. The coming-about of such a nature, or body, is by physical breeding, and its training is a re-wilding, carried out beyond the walls of the city and of convention.

For Pindar, whatever part human envy, the many, and convention has in covering up the truth and suppressing or distorting nature—whether through active suppression, through miseducation, or by some other means — nature is always by far the stronger part, and, unlike Plato, who is in so many other things his student, Pindar seems to remain confident that the wild and overweening nature of his aristocrats will never fail to express itself and emerge in great and violent deeds. **This is because, to repeat the crucial fact that must be realized about the idea of nature at its conception, it is not only a matter of kind or quality—i.e., not only a matter of inclination or orientation to certain activities or objects of desire—but primarily one of intensity. The adjective Pindar most often uses to call the noble, the esloi or esthloi, comes directly from the verb esthai, “to be.”** This should be read quite literally: they are organisms who have more being; it is a question of having sufficient amount of nature within oneself. 

Nietzsche's words on this matter: 

- They call themselves “the truthful,” above all the Greek nobility...The word developed for this characteristic, ἐσθλος [esthlos: fine, noble], indicates, according to its root meaning, a man who is, who possesses reality, who really exists, who is true. Then, with a subjective transformation, it indicates the true man as the truthful man. In this phase of conceptual transformation it becomes the slogan and catch phrase for the nobility, and its sense shifts entirely over to mean “aristocratic,” to mark a distinction from the lying common man, as Theognis takes and presents him.

Pindar maintains the earlier meaning of “noble,” of esthlos, of an organism that has more being, more reality. The nature or breeding of Pindar’s heroes and aristocrats is so vehement as to be almost not suppressible. This attitude appears vividly in one of the most beautiful passages from his opus, the assembly of adventurers known as the Argonauts—one of the longest, if not the longest, myths recounted in all of Pindar, and a proper recapitulation of the entire drama of phusis-nomos. 

- “I say that I am going to bring the teaching of Cheiron; for I come from his cave, from the presence of Chariclo and Philyra, where the holy daughters of the Centaur raised me. Living twenty years without having said or done anything shameful in their house, I have come to my home to recover the ancient honor of my father, now held improperly, which once Zeus granted to Aeolus, the leader of the people, and to his sons. For I hear that lawless Pelias, yielding to his empty mind, violently robbed it from my parents, who were the rulers by right.... And Jason himself at once sent messengers everywhere to announce the voyage. Soon there came the three sons, untiring in battle, whom dark-eyed Alcmena and Leda bore to Zeus son of Cronus; and two high-haired men, sons of the earth-shaker, obeying their innate valor, one from Pylos and the other from the headland of Taenarus; you both achieved noble fame, Euphemus and wide-ruling Periclymenus. And from Apollo the lyre-player came, the father of songs, much-praised Orpheus. And Hermes of the golden wand sent two sons to take part in the unabating toil, Echion and Erytus, bursting with youth. Swiftly came those that dwell around the foothills of Mount Pangaeon, for with a smiling spirit their father Boreas, king of the winds, quickly and willingly equipped Zetes and Calais with purple wings bristling down their backs. And Hera kindled in the demigods an all-persuasive sweet longing for the ship Argo, so that no one would be left behind to stay by his mother’s side, nursing a life without danger, **but even at the risk of death would find the finest elixir of excellence together with his other companions.**

This is a recreation of the primeval Mannerbund, morya, comitatus or, in Greek, kouros, ephebes, hetairia, the society of young warriors, mentioned already in the first chapter—the raw material or most basic form from which, as we will see, the philosophical brotherhoods and schools of a later time will take their form as from an archetype.

The most striking phrase in this entire passage just quoted, however, is regarding the “two high-haired men, sons of the earth-shaker, who, obeying their inner valor,” could not resist Jason’s call for adventure and danger of death. The actual phrase is aidesthentes alkan, and would be more literally translated as “in awe/ashamed of their own great daring.” This is entirely in keeping with the earlier passage from Isthmian 7 discussed above, wherein “Strepsiades... is the victor in the pancratium at the Isthmus, both awesome in his strength and handsome to look at; and he treats/holds excellence (areta) as not uglier/more shameful/inferior to body (phue). He is made radiant by the violet-haired Muses...” The power of phua is irresistible, its calling must be obeyed. The “divine blood” in the aristocrats that Pindar claims could not “sit still.” He maintains the older understanding of “noble” that Nietzsche mentions—the noble, the esthloi, are simply those that have more being, more reality, more vehemence, who emerge from the obscure darkness of mortal men into the radiance of eternal fame through great deeds of areta. They are in religious awe—aideomai is a verb often used with reference to divine or religious objects and totems—of their own inner violence or daring and can’t resist its call. This impetuousness is precisely what they were bred for. For this reason maybe he believed that no law or regime could ever restrain excellence, nor really ever be responsible for its having emerged. Areta and by extension the biological fundamental phusis from which it emerges is beyond all convention, all law, all regime, and can co-opt, prosper under, or take over any; it is the only thing that is “regime-independent” or “convention-independent”: “Under all laws the straight-spoken man excels, whether by the side of a tyranny, or whenever the furious mob, or when the wise watch over the city.”

- I have many swift arrows in the quiver under my arm, arrows that speak to the initiated. But the masses need interpreters. The wise man knows many things by nature, while those who have only learned chatter with violent and indiscriminate tongues in vain like crows against the divine bird of Zeus. Now, bend your bow toward the mark; tell me, my mind, whom are we trying to hit as we shoot arrows of fame from a gentle mind? I will aim at Acragas, and speak with true intent a word sworn by oath: no city for a hundred years has given birth to a man more beneficent in his mind or more generous with his hand than Theron.

The wise man knows many things by his nature, in his blood or body — sophos ho polla eidos phuai. Those who have merely learned produce just a lot of chatter — in particular violent, indiscriminate chatter that covers up with its boisterous sound and superiority in number the calm and elevated, but veiled, truth that the wise man speaks to the initiated.

The eagle is a totem of Pindar and appears again at significant occasions: “The eagle is swift among birds: he swoops down from afar, and suddenly seizes with his talons his blood-stained quarry; but chattering daws stay closer to the ground.” The wise man possesses a great eye—an “inborn eye.” He is on the hunt for prey, for truth or insight about the world, which is snatched up in one bold move from afar, from high up, or hit from afar as an archer hits his target. The art of seeing, of bringing out forgotten truths into the radiant light, in short, wisdom, is an inborn art, it is knowledge by nature or by the blood. By contrast those who have learned—whether it be the mass of the many who need interpreters—or their representatives, the “learned,” the mathontes, the pursuers of the didaktai aretai, that is, the try-hards and intellectuals who are utterly demotic and conventional; these produce mere chatter. Wisdom is a matter of silent insight from afar, an inborn skill; it is not a matter of discussion, endless words, the boisterous chatter of the envious. This latter is the province of the undifferentiated and ignorant many and their flatterers, this is the darkness of nomos that seeks to drown out with its violence and sound the radiance of wisdom, to suppress the wise man, to suppress phua.

“All the resources for the achievements of mortal excellence come from the gods; for wisdom, or having powerful arms, or an eloquent tongue.” However, as we have seen above on so many occasions, this is so only in the sense that the genealogies of blood and body in which such excellences are transferred are ultimately traceable back to a divine or semi-divine progenitor, who engendered a new race or who, like Cheiron, set up a fortuitous marriage for good breeding: the word used here for “come” is ephun, again from phuo: are grown, bred from the gods.

The object of investigation of the philosopher — nature, phusis, by which philosophy itself stands or falls — is itself at its origin only apparent as blood. That is, it emerges from the ubiquity and homogeneity and darkness of convention, becomes apparent to the perception of the wise man as a fact of biological breeding. In this it has rather the character of a revelation or a manifestation to the immediate perception, rather than a discovery by logical deduction. Nature is made manifest to the seer and poet through the observation of botanical or animal life, and through the persistence of inherited qualities across generations.

- It is his lot to have noble friends to bring against his slanderers, like water against smoke. Various men have various skills. It is right for a man to follow straight paths, and strive according to his nature. For strength manifests itself in action, and intelligence in counsels, for those who have the inborn skill of foreseeing the future.

- Wealth is widely powerful, whenever a mortal man receives it, blended with pure excellence, from the hands of fortune, and takes it as a companion that makes many friends. Arcesilas, favored by the gods, from the first steps of your famous life you seek for it with glory, by the grace of Castor with his golden chariot, who, after the wintry storm, sheds calm on your blessed hearth. Wise men are better able to bear even god-given power. Great prosperity surrounds you, as you walk with justice. First, since you are a king of great cities, your inborn eye looks on this as a most revered prize of honor, united with your mind; and you are blessed even now, because you have already earned the boast of victory with your horses from the renowned Pythian festival, and you will welcome this victory-procession of men, a delight for Apollo.

One has then to speculate that Pindar is claiming this is a new type of ruler who unites all the separate traditional virtues that the aristocracy bred for—andreia, phronesis, and now, in unprecedented way, sophia—into one man. We might call this a man of genius. We see that Pindar himself, though living firmly in the aristocratic world and at the height of the aristocratic world, recognizes in some preliminary way that an aristocracy in great danger or at the point of its “decline”—on the edge of the civilized world and ever at risk of losing its liberties—produces, under emergency conditions as the final product of its program of breeding and education, a tyrant. That is, a ruler who, unlike a traditional king, is outside all nomos, all traditional law and restraint and who, although embodying the chief aristocratic virtues in their “distilled” form—perhaps, we could say a genius—is not himself an aristocrat and not bound by the limitations, customs, traditions, or orientations of any particular class. He is, in other words, aristocratic phusis “radicalized” and unbound. This is the origin of the genius, bred for war.

## Covert Teaching of Tyranny in Political Philosophy 

The production—the breeding—and training or protection of this biological specimen—the production of genius—is the original and fundamental function of political philosophy on one hand, and of tyranny on the other. The study of political philosophy therefore makes special demands on the reader: he must read it also, if not primarily, as rhetoric, and therefore read between the lines, with special attention to means of concealment and dissimulation.

In the Gorgias we have the perfect moment of “Platonic political philosophy”: the moment when the philosopher is both forced to become political as a matter of self-defense, and the moment when philosophy becomes “political,” when it begins to put on a mask and to become a rhetorical project of apologetics intended to portray the philosopher as a man of “justice” and a “good citizen.”:

- For by what manner of right did Xerxes march against Greece, or his father against Scythia? Or take the countless other cases of the sort that one might mention. Why, surely these men follow nature—the nature of right—in acting thus; yes, on my soul, and follow the law of nature — though not that, I dare say, which is made by us; we mold the best and strongest amongst us, taking them from their infancy like young lions, and utterly enthrall them by our spells and witchcraft, telling them the while that they must have but their equal share, and that this is what is fair and just. But, I fancy, when some man arises with enough nature, he shakes off all that we have taught him, bursts his bonds, and breaks free; he tramples underfoot our codes and juggleries, our charms and “laws,” which are all against nature; our slave rises in revolt and shows himself our master, and there shines out the full light of the right by nature. 

The reader will be reminded in Callicles’ speech immediately of the numerous parallels to the words and ideas of Pindar. A man—not anthropos, but aner, a word pregnant with meaning—with “enough nature” arises in revolt out of the primordial and constraining and homogenized darkness of nomos to manifest himself as a master: in this event shines out the right by nature, shines out the truth as opposed to the lies of the many. In this passage four such “Pindaric” words follow one upon another in quick succession: anephane, exelampse, endeiknusthai, tekmairomai, all invoking images of a vivid truth that arises into the light and manifests itself out of something. Convention is chatter and darkness and false speech over against which the bare biological fact of superior breeding—the possession of “enough nature”—manifests itself with force as the only vivid truth; even the image of the lion in this context must be Pindaric, although the sinister suggestion here made that convention can smother and suppress nature, particularly the nature of a lion, does not really exist in Pindar. Also seemingly unprecedented is the phrase “law of nature,” a commonplace in our time, but a seeming contradiction in terms during pre-Platonic or pre-Socratic antiquity. This is, as far as is known, the first instance of this phrase in history. It is in any case without doubt that Plato is having Callicles invoke Pindar in this speech and particularly even in this phrase of “the law of nature,” especially since Callicles actually quotes Pindar in the very next line of his speech:

- And it seems to me that Pindar adds his evidence to what I say, in the ode where he says— “Law the sovereign of all, Mortals and immortals,” which, so he continues,— “Carries all with highest hand, Justifying the utmost force: in proof I take The deeds of Hercules, for unpurchased” —the words are something like that—I do not know the poem well—but it tells how he drove off the cows as neither a purchase nor a gift from Geryones; taking it as a natural right that cows or any other possessions of the inferior and weaker should all belong to the superior and stronger.

If we should pay close attention to Callicles’ words in the passage above it will become clear that there is one and only one thing that concerns him beyond everything else: liberation from nomos or convention. This idea is a repetition of the opposition between truth (aletheia) and nature on one hand and the common establishments (sunthemata) on the other. These statements show that for Callicles shame, the base things, the demos, and convention stand together on one side while on the other we have truth, nature, and the noble things. Callicles makes the amazing claim that truth itself and the just by nature will shine out only in the escape or revolt from convention, and in the trampling of it. The just by nature therefore, the truth about nature, although observed from many occurrences in nature, is not the default case in nature, but depends on a revolt against convention. Just as earlier not lack of knowledge, but lack of daring, stood in the way of the manifestness of nature or truth, so now not lack of physical power or knowledge, but lack of “a sufficient nature” stands in the way of the shining out of the just by nature—the superior man becoming a despot. This is Callicles’ surprising and radical conclusion: nomos controls not by physical power, but by a kind of speaking or “education.”

A mental liberation from the notions of his city and a practical liberation from its political demands on his life is a prerequisite for such a philosopher, and such a liberation is indeed possible only with the insight that these notions and claims are merely conventions, common decisions and decrees of the fellow citizens without true binding power. If a talented and ambitious young man hears this and understands all of this to be true, liberation from the city’s ways becomes a necessity. To conform to the city’s ways cannot be acceptable, because it has been agreed that the city as such consists only in the common decisions of the many. These common decisions lack all justification besides the word of the many, which is no justification at all. In fact, one may make a case, as Callicles indeed does, that the young man who could become a philosopher, i.e., who has insight into the primal philosophical distinction between nature and convention, not only has a right but even a duty to become tyrant. Such a duty may even be called properly philosophical, literally guided by the love of truth. Callicles reaches this conclusion in the following way.

Callicles’ rejection of the philosophical life and pursuit of tyranny, is, I cannot repeat enough, a conclusion he has reached from serious philosophical reflection, perhaps too-earnest reflection. Callicles is in fact a philosopher who has discovered that the radical philosophic insight must consist in a rejection of the anachoretic and private philosophical life. He is not the voice of the city or the political community, less still merely of a gentleman, an “Attic Junker.” He is the voice of pre-Socratic philosophy become political.

I offer the following speculative reconstruction of Callicles’ “philosophical” reasoning in favor of the pursuit of tyranny. Callicles’ chief concern is the salvation of the “better-turned-out” from corruption by the nomos and the liberation of such specimens from nomos. In this salvation and liberation is expressed at the very least the precondition for truth or the search for truth: but actually, I would claim, in this is expressed also truth itself. That is, the manifestation of truth in the world, “the shining out of the right by nature,” the “law of nature,” is the “better-turned-out” freeing himself from and trampling on convention or nomos. Truth or right express themselves in the preservation and emergence into the light of phusis or nature. In this context it is most significant that the word used by Callicles (and by Socrates) all along in their discussion for the “better-turned-out” is erromenesteros, a word with biological connotations. This word comes from rhonnumi, to have strength, might, to be in good health; this word, the same that Plato uses in the Republic (sungeneia erromene, emphasizing inborn might and health at Rep. 491c; at 491d he uses the word in relation to botanical or animal growth) to describe the potential philosopher, is often otherwise used to indicate vigor, vigorous growth, vehemence. The preservation of the “superior breed” or biological specimen is the preservation of nature in the world and therefore the guarantee of the emergence of truth about the world. Callicles might say, “The natural, original activity of the erromenesteros is philosophy—it is what the erromenesteros gladly pursues in his childhood and youth—but it didn’t work; it leads to men like Socrates being killed; it leads to the extinction of breeding and therefore of the knowledge of nature in the world; for nature and truth to preserve and manifest themselves the ‘philosophers,’ or rather the erromenesteroi, the men of ‘sufficient nature’ from whom the philosopher would under ideal circumstances organically emerge, must take power in the cities and grasp for a tyranny.” It is the “spiritual tyranny” of pre-Socratic philosophy become politically active under emergency conditions of persecution and turned into the pursuit of actual tyranny. According to Callicles one may restate the relationship between philosophy and the erromenesteros in this way: the distinction between nature and convention is inextricably tied to the distinction between superior and inferior human natures. Convention only originates and consists in the common decisions of the inferior to protect themselves from the superior, and convention or myth and false speech is the only element that covers up nature and truth. It is the superior human specimens or the erromenesteroi who have the unique access to the distinction between nature and convention, and they only have this access in the best circumstances; they are ever in danger of being corrupted, enslaved, smothered by nomos.

A man who practices philosophy late into life will be kept in a state of permanent childhood—at least this is the main point of Callicles’ discussion at; in other words, the lion will not be able to break free. Now, the breaking free of the lion is for Callicles the manifestation of truth. It is significant that in the model just sketched out, the primal truth is a manifestation of natural superiority in the world. **Truth, nature, and nobility or physical-mighty beauty, all one and the same, are manifest for Callicles.**

By contrast speech is used for deception, speech belongs to convention, and truth is hidden only by the false and deceptive speech of convention. **Convention, shame, and the inferior many, are one and the same—they use deception in speech to cover up manifest truth.** It is in this sense that in Callicles’ speeches the escape from convention through the assertion of raw superior nature over the many is a philosophical act, for it literally expresses the love of truth, or even more literally, is the only genuine expression of truth, the only moment when truth is uncovered and “unforgotten.” For Callicles, Socrates’ impending execution by a lower form of man, by a mokhtheros is the best example of how philosophy, which was born with the discovery of nature and thereby with the awakening of the superior human specimens, is completely unable to actually provide for their advantage, but works instead for their corruption, enslavement, and destruction. Paradoxically, it is not philosophy that is the liberation for the superior human natures even though philosophy is in some sense the “original” activity of such natures. It is only rhetoric or tyranny won through the art of rhetoric that can provide the means to liberation and defense for philosophers: philosophers merely practicing philosophy are thereby committing suicide, and the suicide of philosophy at the hands of the many or of convention is the covering-up of truth, quite literally. 

It is also an indication to philosophers that to make their fundamental character public and to defend it, or to defend animus against convention publicly, as Callicles does, leads not only to the encouragement of tyranny but to the general dissolution of any state and to the proliferation of moral decadence. It would lead to conditions in which not only philosophy, but any kind of political health or dynamism would be impossible. Only in the case of men of great ability and will would the public defense of “having more” or of licentiousness lead to something good—it is only good for “healthy” souls; in the general case, presumably of botched souls and insufficient natures, it would lead merely to decay, weakness, and wretchedness. The accusation that “having more” leads to the life of the catamite is clearly not directed against Callicles—no sane reader would believe that such a life was ever on Callicles’ mind in his defense of licentiousness. This accusation is an indication to philosophers that to make their erotic character public and to defend it, in the Calliclean manner, will lead to general political and social decay—for as Nietzsche says, there is no congruence between the sensuality of the artist and of the people.

Nature—the fundamental ground on which both tyranny and philosophy meet—is concealed, not from the philosophers themselves, but beneath the public mask of philosophy, which henceforth becomes a pose of piety, of righteousness, which henceforth becomes moralistic. As someone else said, the Platonic project—both for the masking of philosophy and, through this masking, for its “rule in the cities,” for its attainment of the ultimate power—has been “all too successful.” Nietzsche relays Epicurus’ sarcastic mockery of Platonism and the Platonic project at its very beginnings for very good reason: for, as we will see in the next chapter, it is Nietzsche himself who, in modern times, faced by emergency—no, by imminent catastrophe—felt the need to criticize and overturn the entire Platonic project and re-expose, as it were, the origins of philosophy in something more fundamental, in an ancient understanding of nature. This same Platonic project had become “too successful” and threatened to extinguish not only philosophy, but the cultural preconditions of philosophy, and therefore the possibility of philosophy itself. The time was needful to expose the pre- philosophical roots of philosophy, to expose the original meaning of “nature” as the cultivation of blood and breeding, in which philosophy and tyranny share a kinship or a twinship. It is in this sense that Nietzsche’s vitalism and his “Calliclean” language must be understood; the modern Nietzschean argument, which strips away exoteric Platonic rhetoric and mise-en-scene to show the identity between tyranny and philosophy is ultimately at its source an attempt to revitalize philosophy itself.

## Nietzsche on the Origin of Philosophy and Tyranny in the Decay of Aristocratic Regimes

The decline or decay of a type of aristocracy allows for the “distillation,” the abstraction, or the “radicalization” of the aristocratic ethos, of the principle underlying aristocratic life—which, as has been argued in the previous chapters, is to be reduced to the classical standard of nature. The appearance of philosophers, and the birth of philosophy itself in the sense of the intensity of the philosophical way of life, is historically not separable from the production of potential tyrants. According to Nietzsche these represent, to put it provisionally, the aristocratic type as unmoored from the strictures of aristocratic morality, from attachment to any particular historical regime. 

In Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks, `[[The Pre-Socratics]]` Nietzsche laments that philosophy in our own time has no home and no power: he connects the problem of philosophy with the problem of high culture in a direct and certain way:

- A period which suffers from a so-called high general level of liberal education but which is devoid of culture in the sense of a unity of style which characterizes all its life, will not quite know what to do with philosophy and wouldn’t, if the Genius of Truth himself were to proclaim it in the streets and the market places. During such times philosophy remains the learned monologue of the lonely stroller, the accidental loot of the individual, the secret skeleton in the closet, or the harmless chatter between senile academics and children. No one may venture to fulfill philosophy’s law with his own person, no one may live philosophically with that simple loyalty which compelled an ancient, no matter where he was or what he was doing, to deport himself as a Stoic if he once had pledged faith to the Stoa. All modern philosophizing is political, policed by governments, churches, academies, custom, fashion, and human cowardice, all of which limit it to a fake learnedness. Our philosophy stops with the sigh “If only ...” and with the insight “Once upon a time ...” Philosophy has no rights, and modern man, if he had any courage or conscience, should really repudiate it. He might ban it with words similar to those which Plato used to ban the tragic poets from his state, though reply could be made, just as the tragic poets might have made reply to Plato. If forced for once to speak out, philosophy might readily say, “Wretched people! Is it my fault if I am roaming the country among you like a cheap fortune-teller? If I must hide and disguise myself as though I were a fallen woman and you my judges? Just look at my sister, Art! Like me, she is in exile among barbarians. We no longer know what to do to save ourselves. True, here among you we have lost all our rights, but the judges who shall restore them to us shall judge you too. And to you they shall say: Go get yourselves a culture. Only then you will find out what philosophy can and will do.”

The passage just quoted reveals an important and related element of Nietzsche’s understanding of philosophy, which is that philosophy is a way of life. The understanding of philosophy as primarily a way of life, and not just a discipline of learning, let alone the substance of any one particular teaching or ideology, remains consistent throughout Nietzsche’s writings. 

